Copyright © 2013 by Beatrice Chestnut
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, digital scanning, or other electronic or
mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright
law. For permission requests, please address She Writes Press.
Published 2013
ISBN: 978-1-938314-55-1
For information, address:
She Writes Press
1563 Solano Ave #546
Berkeley, CA 94707

This book is dedicated to David and Charlotte, in the hope that they will grow up in a more
conscious world.

You need not, and in fact cannot, teach an acorn to grow into an oak
tree; but when given a chance, its intrinsic potentialities will develop.
Similarly, the human individual, given a chance, tends to develop his
particular human potentialities….In short, he will grow, substantially
undiverted, toward self-realization.
But, like any other living organism, the human individuum needs
favorable conditions for his growth “from acorn into oak tree;” he
needs an atmosphere of warmth to give him both a feeling of inner
security and the inner freedom enabling him to have his own feelings
and thoughts and to express himself. He needs the good will of others,
not only to help him in his many needs, but to guide and encourage
him to become a mature and fulfilled individual. He also needs healthy
friction with the wishes and wills of others. If he can thus grow with
others, in love and in friction, he will also grow in accordance with his
real self.
—Karen Horney, MD, in
Neurosis and Human Growth:
The Struggle Toward Self-Realization

Introduction:

Self-Awareness and the Enneagram
The faculty of voluntarily bringing back a wandering attention, over
and over again, is the very root of judgment, character, and will. No
one is compos sui [master of himself] if he have it not. An education
which should improve this faculty would be the education par
excellence.
—William James, Principles of Psychology

Between stimulus and response, there is a space. In the space there is
the power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and
our freedom.
—Victor Frankl

MANY PEOPLE TODAY SEEK ANSWERS to such questions as “Why do I do the
things I do?” or “How can I have more fulfilling relationships?” or “How
can I achieve better results in my work and live a more satisfying life?”
When we want or need to make some sort of positive change in our lives,
we understandably look for a path to greater self-understanding that’s both
easy-to-use in everyday life and effective in helping with life’s many
challenges.
Being able to change your behavior is central to any personal growth
effort, and at the same time it’s incredibly difficult, given the power of our
unconscious habits. In order to change behavior to achieve personal growth,
we must develop one capacity: We must develop the ability to create the
mental and emotional space inside ourselves to observe and understand
what we are doing and think about why we do it. From this starting point of
being able to see our thoughts and feelings in action instead of just being
absorbed by them, we can begin to see more clearly where and how we are
stuck in a habit and how we can make the conscious choice to do something

different. If we have the mental room to reflect on the nuts and bolts of our
habitual functioning, we open the door to greater self-understanding.
In this book, I hope to achieve two goals. First, to show how ancient
wisdom teachings illuminate the idea that self-knowledge—which I define
as the capacity to observe, think about, and own your thoughts, feelings,
and actions—is the key to real growth and the ability to live a happier, more
balanced life. And second, to provide a map and a set of instructions—your
owner’s manual for your own self—that will show you how to expand your
self-knowledge so you can start or deepen your study of your self in a way
that leads to positive change.
You can create a seismic shift in your life through increasing your selfknowledge, and this book will help you examine the unconscious and
automatic thoughts, feelings, and actions that make up most of what you do
every day. It will teach you ways to make these moments more conscious
and purposeful. From ancient times through today, this practice is the
foundation for leading a life that is more creative, flexible, whole, effective,
authentic, and content.

The Common Truth of the Human Condition:
We Are Asleep
EACH OF US IS UNIQUE and endowed with great potential, but we exist in a kind of
waking sleep because of our early childhood programming.
The good news is, much of what we need to know about how to achieve
greater peace, freedom, and self-knowledge has been around for hundreds
or maybe thousands of years, encoded in ancient teachings, philosophy,
myths, and symbols. However, it can be difficult for modern people to
access these timeless truths about what it means to be human and how we
can transform ourselves to manifest our highest possibilities. The purpose
of this book, therefore, is to introduce, explain, and translate central aspects
of a profound wisdom tradition that has been around for centuries, but has
only been rediscovered in the last fifty years or so.
This ancient teaching begins with the idea that in order for us to grow
and change—to develop our ability to make more conscious choices—we
first need to know how we truly operate in the present. To become all that
we can be, we must start where we are and know exactly where and who we
are. One of our deepest unconscious patterns is the false belief that we
already know ourselves well enough to understand why we think, feel, and

act the way we do. I will argue that, in fact, we don’t; and that thinking we
do know who we are is part of the problem.
In order to know ourselves and evolve in positive ways, we first need to
see that we essentially operate in a kind of “waking sleep.” Without
conscious effort, we function to a large degree mechanically, according to
habitual patterns, as we go about our everyday lives. Our “sleep” is the
unexamined belief we all have that we live lives of relatively unlimited
freedom, when the opposite is true: We respond in predictable, repetitive
ways according to the dictates of our early programming, much like
uniquely specialized machines. And like machines, we have no power to
grow out of this pre-programmed condition as long as we have no
conscious understanding of how our existence is limited by our
programming. We don’t always understand what we don’t understand and
we are limited to the degree that we don’t recognize our limitations.
This idea that the human condition naturally places us in this state of
unconscious, automatic behavior can be found in both Western
psychological theory and Eastern spiritual traditions. Indeed, we can see
evidence of our own “waking sleep” in the ways in which we repeat the
same comfortable habits day after day, and how we regularly tune out and
go “on autopilot.” When we go into a room and forget why we went there,
or when we are reading a book and realize we did not really take in the
content of the last page, or when we feel ourselves engaging in conversation
while our minds are simultaneously “drifting,” or when something
significant happens and we can’t really feel our emotions in response to it—
all of these are telltale signs that our habits are running the show. Perhaps
it’s more accurate to say that our habits are the show. Our work, therefore, is
to learn to pay attention more consistently to what is actually happening in
our lives.
In psychological terms, this “dimming of consciousness” expresses the
fact that as a basic survival mechanism, the human psyche automatically
“goes to sleep to,” or dissociates from painful experiences as a way of
surviving or staying safe in the world. While we humans are remarkable
creatures, we have some basic limitations. It is impossible to be aware of
everything that is going on all the time and advantageous to learn ways of
thinking and acting that help minimize pain and danger, or increase feelings
of comfort and safety. But while it may be good for our survival and our
comfort to avoid an awareness of our own pain and fear—especially early

on in life—if we don’t examine the ways we do this as we get older, we fall
asleep to who we are and all that we might be.
How does this habit of falling asleep to ourselves get started? How and
why do we come to be this way? Human babies have the longest period of
dependency of all mammals, so human children possess inborn, wired-in
defense mechanisms that protect them from being too overwhelmed or
harmed by psychological or emotional threats. Over time, early and
necessary (and sometimes life-saving) defensive maneuvers and coping
strategies evolve into “patterns” of thinking, feeling, and behaving. These
patterns come to operate like “organizing principles,” or beliefs about how
the world works and how we must act in order to survive or thrive. These
patterned coping strategies turn into invisible and automatic “habits” that
influence where your attention goes and what adaptive strategies you
employ to interact in the world.
For instance, a child who feels constant pressure to “be good” may
develop coping strategies that help her to be “perfect,” thereby avoiding
criticism or punishment. Another child with a different set of outside
influences and inner factors may protect himself from threats by developing
a strategy of hiding his vulnerability, finding ways to exert control, and
seeming to be fearless. Each of us automatically adopts specific strategies
for defending ourselves against threats, and these strategies work together
to make up the organizing principles of our personalities.
The behavior patterns we develop to meet early threats eventually
devolve into habits of mind that trigger automatically—even when the
original threats are long gone and we are not confronting anything even
remotely like them in the present. Our psyches develop this desensitized
“waking sleep” to protect us from early emotional pain, but we end up
staying asleep to what’s going on in our lives as we move into adulthood.
This misalignment between our ingrained habits and our yearning to live
authentically and spontaneously becomes a source for all kinds of suffering,
dissatisfaction, and unhappiness. The early coping strategies we don’t need
anymore become unseen prisons that constrain how we think, feel, and act
in ways that feel so familiar and integral that we forget we have the capacity
to choose other options. In this way, we go to sleep to ourselves while
thinking we are still awake. We lose our freedom to engage creatively and
consciously in the world without even knowing we’ve lost it.

Many spiritual traditions attempt to explain our dissociation, or to
practice ways to stay conscious to ourselves, but I believe that we only have
to look to our own lives to see how we fall into old unconscious patterns
that can make us unhappy. Here is an example of this from my own
experience: When I was growing up, I focused a lot on relationships—on
making other people happy as a way of helping me feel safe. My strategy
for avoiding the pain of other people’s criticisms or rejections was to be
charming and pleasant. I would “make people like me” by being likable and
pleasing so that I didn’t have to suffer from the bad feelings connected to
disapproval and separation. Without being conscious of it, this led to me
going to sleep to my own feelings, needs, and desires, because if I asserted
my own feelings and needs, I might come into conflict with someone who
didn’t want to deal with my anger or sadness, or couldn’t meet my needs.
Over time, I lost touch with what I was feeling moment to moment. My
roommate in graduate school once observed that I never got angry. I was
surprised by this at first, but then I realized it was true. To serve my main
life strategy of getting along with others and avoiding any kind of problem
in relationships, I had lost touch with the natural flow of my emotions and
the ability to know what I needed and wanted. And, for a long time, I didn’t
even know this was happening.
The self-protective habits I acquired early on in life caused problems for
me later because these habits represent self-limiting strategies based on an
overly narrow perspective of my capacity to manage life’s many situations.
Each in our own way, we unavoidably get stuck in an early response pattern
that served us in our first environment, but has since become the source of
our day-to-day unconsciousness. However, if we can notice, pay attention
to, and study these habitual response patterns, we can do the liberating
“self-work” of understanding them, working against them, and letting them
go. Sometimes, just seeing a habit and understanding why it developed can
be enough to free yourself from its grip. In other cases, with more stubborn
or deeply ingrained patterns, you may need to work with yourself in
specific ways over time to fully overcome and reverse the automatic nature
of your programming. Either way, the first steps are to understand that we
all fall asleep and to notice how you go to sleep to yourself.

Another Common Truth of the Human Condition:
We Can Wake Up

FORTUNATELY, THE BASIC TRUTH that we are stuck in our unconscious patterns
goes hand in hand with another core truth about the human condition: This
“waking sleep” is also the starting point for the crucial process of waking
up. The ability to wake up is not only possible, but also an inherent part of
being human. We fall asleep as we come into this world and acquire a
personality, but the potential for conscious growth and transformation is
part of our makeup. In fact, many ancient wisdom traditions say that this
task of waking up to become aware of who we are represents the purpose of
human life on earth.
So if your automatic patterns of feeling, thinking, and behaving put you
to sleep to your own life, how do you wake up? We can become more
conscious (and wake up) by learning how to observe and study ourselves
more objectively. This process gradually deepens self-knowledge by
building our conscious understanding of who we really are and what is
really going on. But while the capacity to wake up is part of our nature,
doing the work it takes to awaken requires consistent effort. If we get lazy,
we are in danger of falling asleep again.
The self-observation that can free you from your own brand of “waking
sleep” begins with the conscious experience of perceiving your own
unconsciousness. The practice of looking for your own automatic patterns
of thinking, feeling, and acting builds a more objective interior capacity for
self-awareness separate from these patterns. Over time, this effort
engenders an ability to recognize when you have gone on automatic, or
when your “program” is running. (As my cousin, Chris Fasano, used to say,
you start to “catch on to your own game.”) This self-observation creates a
separation between your patterns and your consciousness so that you can
watch automatic thoughts, feelings, and actions unfold without “being one”
with them or judging them (or yourself) as good or bad. You need this
separation to have the mental space to detach from these habits of mind—to
let them go and make other choices more consciously.
The first step for anyone who wants to wake up and evolve out of
mechanical habits is to start to observe those habits. Usually, we are so
accustomed to doing what we do that we don’t question any of it. So the
entry point is to catch yourself snoozing, to slow down and make an active
effort to observe yourself consciously and see what you are doing with
more distance or objectivity. And to do this, you need to learn how to pay
attention to what you are paying attention to (and not paying attention to).

Both psychological method and spiritual teachings point to simple forms
of meditation practice as the best way to develop and expand the capacity to
self-reflect and exercise conscious intention. Most of all, meditation helps
to build up your ability to notice and consciously stabilize or shift your
“focus of attention.” Self-reflection and self-inquiry—asking yourself,
“What am I paying attention to and why?”—allow you to answer deeper
questions about the “what, why, and how” of your thoughts, feelings, and
actions, instead of just taking them all for granted.
Another way ancient tradition expresses this basic form of meditative
practice as the practical key to success in nearly every domain is through
the concept of “concentration,” or the “faculty of fixing maximum attention
on a minimum of space.” When we can develop some ability to still the
automatic thoughts of the mind through concentration, we start to build a
“zone of silence” within ourselves that we can draw upon in everyday life
to support our self-observational efforts.
The practice of self-observation consists of putting your attention on your
thoughts, feelings, and actions in the present moment and bringing your
focus back over and over again from wherever it inevitably wanders.
Studying your own thinking, feeling, or doing in the present moment
without judgment becomes your chosen “object of attention,” rather than
allowing your mind to continue being preoccupied with its usual reactive,
habitual patterns. This mindfulness activity is an exercise in becoming more
conscious to what is going on inside you and remembering to be more
purposeful in tuning in to yourself more often. As with repetition in
physical exercise, the “attentional muscle” strengthens through a consistent
effort to notice where your attention goes and then shift it back to a focus
you have chosen consciously.

***
This attentional-muscle-strengthening process also allows you to develop
and actively employ an “inner witness.” The cultivation of an internal
“witnessing consciousness” is a key ingredient in both meditation practices
and many forms of psychotherapy. And, paradoxically, it’s both incredibly
simple and extremely difficult to do. The basic practice of exercising your
attentional muscle is easy in that it involves a straightforward activity that
you can do anytime and anywhere. However, it can be challenging to

sustain the consistent effort it takes to actually do it. “Self-remembering”—
remembering to pay conscious attention to yourself—never becomes
habitual, so it takes practice to develop the capacity to actually pay
attention, notice when you aren’t paying attention, shift attention, and, in
doing that over and over again, effectively self-observe and become more
“awake.”
Happily, we are living at a moment in history in which people from
different fields of study are all beginning to see this basic act of selfawareness as the vital ingredient in personal development. From
psychotherapy to spirituality to philosophy to brain science to leadership
training and business development, people working on the question of
“What promotes human growth and well-being?” in varied areas are
focusing on these same elements as the factors that stimulate positive
change, effectiveness, health, and fulfillment. What has previously been the
exclusive territory of spiritual directors and psychotherapists has entered the
mainstream of thinking about what it means to be human and how we can
develop our innate human capacities to achieve greater freedom and
happiness. And it all begins with the simple idea of developing the ability to
pay attention, and in doing so, generating a clearer understanding of what is
going on inside you.

The Enneagram as a Map for
Developing Self-Awareness
THE AGE-OLD INJUNCTION, “Know Thyself,” inscribed on the Temple of
Apollo at Delphi in ancient Greece, was based on profound philosophical
teachings that recognized that the key to knowledge of the natural world
and human possibilities within it begins with studying our individual
“selves,” as well as our physical environment. This cornerstone wisdom of
Western culture saw the study of the human being from the inside (each of
us working to understand our own inner territory) as a necessary project
that went hand in hand with the scientific study of the outside world.
In the last century, a few individuals have rediscovered a powerful longlost teaching that conveys a clear vision of how we humans function. This
teaching was encoded in something called The Enneagram, which basically
means “a drawing of nine.” The Enneagram symbol is a nine-pointed star
inscribed in a circle that provides a framework for, among other things, a
personality type system of twenty-seven distinct character “archetypes.” In

recent years people all over the world have recognized this ancient wisdom
as something genuine, amazing, and life changing.

On the surface, the Enneagram is a personality type system of nine
interconnected personality archetypes or types. Each of those nine types is
connected to four others arrayed around a symbolic diagram. The
Enneagram symbol has ancient and mysterious origins; it represents an
elegant model of some of the fundamental laws of the universe expressed in
mathematical terms that reflect patterns discernible in the natural world,
including in the human ego or personality.
Archetypes are models or prototypes that help us discern and
make sense of universal patterns. According to Carl Jung,
archetypes are “typical modes of apprehension”—or “patterns of
psychic perception and understanding common to all human
beings.”1 Jung took this concept of the archetype from the ancient
Greeks, who viewed the world in terms of “archetypal
principles,” reflecting a vision of the cosmos as “an ordered
expression of certain primordial essences or transcendent first
principles” and archetypes as “clarifying universals in the chaos
of human life.”2 More recently, author Carolyn Myss defines “our
own personal archetypes” as “the psychic lenses through which
we view ourselves and the world around us.”3
The basic core of the teaching associated with the Enneagram reflects the
very same messages communicated by the world’s oldest mystical, psychospiritual, and philosophical traditions: the ability to observe and reflect

upon your experience through the development of an “inner witness” allows
you to acquire greater self-knowledge, which creates the possibility of
attaining a higher state of consciousness. The Enneagram not only provides
a great deal of help in the process of increasing self-awareness—by
showing the “inner witness” what to pay attention to—but also provides a
method for how we can change and grow based on that vision.
As we begin to “study” ourselves, it helps to have some sort of guidance.
We think, feel, and do so many things every day—how can we even begin
to make sense of it all? This is where the Enneagram comes in. As an
ancient and universal model of human development and transformation, the
Enneagram offers an accurate and objective view of the archetypal patterns
that structure the human personality. As such, it provides a much-needed
map for those of us who seek to understand ourselves on a deeper level.
The Enneagram describes three “centers of intelligence,” nine personality
“types,” and twenty-seven “subtypes” that provide an amazingly accurate
picture of personality in terms of the patterns associated with the way we
function. The main idea is that your personality—all of what you think,
feel, and do—is made up of patterns. Even when you try to pay attention
more carefully to what is going on inside you, these patterns can be hard to
detect because you have been doing what you do for so long that the
“patterning” in what you do has become invisible to you, in the same way a
fish doesn’t “notice” the water he’s swimming in. The Enneagram helps you
see these personality patterns in yourself.
How does this process work? And how does it lead to positive change? It
turns out that the many coping strategies we use to get along in life can be
grouped into a finite number of categories, or personality types. By
providing detailed descriptions of the typical thoughts, emotions, and
behaviors that make up nine basic personality types (and the three subtypes
of each of those nine types), the Enneagram highlights how these habitual
patterns get enacted so you can start to see them for yourself.
The Enneagram’s personality descriptions thus provide a map of twentyseven specific sets of themes and patterns. Once you find yourself in one of
these types by matching what you observe yourself doing to one of the
Enneagram personalities, you gain access to a large amount of information
that can help you recognize and understand the patterns in your thoughts,
emotions, and actions.

Central to the effectiveness of the Enneagram as a growth tool is the fact
that it is not a static model. We are complex and transformable beings, and
as a dynamic map of change, the Enneagram reveals how we develop habits
and also how we can free ourselves over time from restrictive habitual
patterns we don’t even realize we are limited by. Beginning to understand
your own personality type allows you to better notice your personality
patterns as they are happening—to “catch yourself in the act” more often—
and release yourself from being trapped by choosing not to remain
unconscious to those patterns.

***
One psychotherapy client I worked with, a lawyer in his late forties whom
I’ll call Max, came in suffering from a great deal of anxiety, which caused
him to continually doubt himself. This constant self-doubt stopped him
from moving forward in his life. He was unable to separate from his wife,
even though it was clear to him that the relationship wasn’t working and he
needed to end it. He tortured himself internally by endlessly questioning
every move he wanted to make. His talent for analysis that made him a
successful lawyer also contributed to his tendency to imagine negative
scenarios he might get stuck in. His belief in his own essential “badness”
caused him to imagine that others were judging him and condemning him.
Through the course of our therapy together, I recognized that he was a
“Self-Preservation Six,” someone who experiences an ongoing sense of fear
and uncertainty, and who engages in a pattern of circular thinking
characterized by questioning and doubt. Even though he was a kind, wellintentioned, intelligent person, he was so paralyzed by his habit of
imagining fearful scenarios that he was unable to act in decisive ways in
support of his own well-being.
By using the Enneagram to guide our understanding of Max’s dilemma,
we were able to zero in on and deal with his most important inner conflicts:
1) his false belief that he was bad and so would be condemned and rejected
by others despite evidence to the contrary; 2) his sense that if he acted on
his own behalf in a decisive way, bad things would happen; and 3) his
mental habits that kept him trapped in fear and anxiety—he had confidence
in his analytical mind, but he doubted everything and was therefore unable
to feel safe in the world. By using the Enneagram map, we were able to first

define and then understand Max’s key issues and afterward provide ways
for him to work through them. As a Self-Preservation Six his central issue
was that he had not developed a strong sense of inner authority (because his
father threatened and abused him and didn’t protect or support him);
therefore, he had become stuck in and ruled by a defensive strategy run
amok. In trying to think his way to certainty and safety using his strong
analytical mind, he got caught in an endless loop of fear and questioning
and was unable to find a way to feel safe and powerful. He was able to
address his heightened anxiety and move forward in his life as he learned to
see his thinking patterns from a larger perspective and engage specific
practices that worked against these tendencies.
Perhaps because of its deep symbolic meaning and its ancient heritage,
the Enneagram system captures the complexity of human habits; the
personalities communicated through it are helpful portrayals of twentyseven distinct sets of patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving. According
to the wisdom tradition associated with the model, personality is seen as a
“false self,” necessary up to a point to interact safely in the world, but also
the means by which we lose touch with our “true self”—which gets buried
in the background as our “false self” comes to the forefront to deal with life.
According to the Enneagram, while the false self or personality is the
“problem,” in that we get so identified with it and mistakenly think it is all
of who we are, it is also the vehicle for getting back to the true self. As we
learn to see through the automatic functioning of the false self or
conditioned personality, we can learn to let it drop or we can work with it
more consciously so that we become less fixated on a narrow perspective
and become more creative and flexible. As such, the Enneagram contains a
vision and a path for breaking out of old habits and realizing your true
potential.

Conclusion
IN ARTICULATING THE POWER of the Enneagram, this book builds most
directly on the work of two authors and teachers, Oscar Ichazo and Claudio
Naranjo. Oscar Ichazo developed the Enneagram in Chile in the 1960s as
part of a larger program of human transformation. Claudio Naranjo, a
psychiatrist with a broad range of knowledge and experience in
psychological and spiritual approaches to human development, learned the
model from Ichazo in 1970 and translated the Enneagram’s types into

Western psychological language. Naranjo refined and expanded the
descriptions of the types as he taught the material over the next decades,
starting in Berkeley in the 1970s. It was from Naranjo’s original group of
students that the Enneagram leaked out and spread around the world. While
many different authors have now published excellent books on the
Enneagram, this book focuses mainly on Naranjo’s descriptions of the
types, the subtypes, and the nature of the path of conscious development
and the work it entails.
In its exploration of why the Enneagram is such a powerful tool for selfknowledge, however, this book builds upon a foundation that is even deeper
and broader than the significant, pioneering contributions of Ichazo and
Naranjo. It comes out of an ancient wisdom tradition that provides a vision
of our larger human purpose and a map for realizing it, as well as my own
studies in the fields of psychology and personal development. In particular,
I have drawn on my training as a psychotherapist, my own personal “selfwork,” and the many lessons I learned from my most direct Enneagram
teachers, Helen Palmer and David Daniels. While I will cite the sources of
the ideas I present throughout this book, it is important to say at the outset
that these two individuals have shaped how I think about these topics to a
degree that can be hard to quantify. Their teachings provide the foundation
of my understanding of this important work.
Most of all, I hope to translate a profound wisdom tradition and highlight
the timeless truths it reveals, while integrating the valuable information it
has to offer with modern insights into what helps us grow and create
positive change. By bringing out the incredibly deep and powerful truths
that have been lost to us for centuries, I hope to inspire you to prioritize
your own development as the key to success in everything you might do in
life. And while this “work on self” challenges us to stretch ourselves
beyond our comfort zones and confront things we’d rather stay asleep to, it
is also a great adventure of the kind immortalized in epic poems and classic
myths that can liberate our energies to live our lives in more peaceful, alive,
authentic, and meaningful ways. My hope is that this book describes a
vision and a method that advances the goal of greater self-awareness and
clarifies the path to achieving it in a way that inspires you forward on your
own journey of personal evolution.

CHAPTER 1:

The Enneagram as a Framework for
Understanding the Multidimensional Nature of
Personality
To be human is to become visible
while carrying what is hidden as a gift to
others.
To remember the other world in this world
is to live in your true inheritance.
You are not a troubled guest on this earth,
you are not an accident amidst other
accidents
you were invited from another and greater
night
than the one from which you have just
emerged.
Now, looking through the slanting light of the
morning window
toward the mountain presence of everything
that can be
what urgency calls you to your one love?
What shape waits in the seed of you
to grow and spread its branches
against a future sky?
—David Whyte, from his poem,
“What to Remember When Waking”

THE TERM “PERSONALITY” generally refers to the part of your character that
develops to interface with the outside world. Our personalities are shaped
through the intersection of our innate qualities and our early experiences
with parents, caregivers, family, and friends, as well as other influences in
our physical, social, and cultural environments.

What is Personality?
MOST OF US THINK OF OUR PERSONALITY as “who we are.” We equate the idea
of personality—the “you” who the people in your life would say they know
—with our sense of identity. But according to the Enneagram, you are more
than just your personality—the personality that you and others associate
with your “self” is only part of who you are. As in Western psychology, the
Enneagram views the personality as a “false self” that develops to allow
your (vulnerable and young) “true self” to adapt, fit in, and survive among
other humans. This perspective holds that personality is a “defensive” or a
“compensatory” self whose coping strategies developed to help us fulfill
our needs and reduce our anxieties.

Personality as Ego and Shadow:
What You See and Don’t See in Yourself
Just as light illuminating an object also casts an area of darkness, said Carl
Jung, the conscious brightness in how you see yourself creates a “Shadow”
aspect of personality that goes unseen, like a blind spot.1 Attributes you
think of as “bad”—feelings of anger, jealousy, hatred, and inferiority—get
relegated to your shadow and become unconscious. (People who tend to
focus on their negative characteristics, conversely, may hide some of their
typically “positive” feelings or qualities in their Shadow.) The Shadow
represents everything we refuse to acknowledge about ourselves that
nonetheless impacts the way we behave. Being blind to parts of ourselves
means that there is often a difference between the person we think we are—
or the person we would like to see ourselves as—and who we really are as
we walk through the world.
We each repress our Shadow aspects because they make us feel
uncomfortable or bad about ourselves; but making these qualities
unconscious gives them the power to create unintended problems in our
lives and relationships when they influence us in ways we don’t see.

Developing our “true” self requires us to know, accept, and integrate all
parts of our selves, including our Shadow elements. The Enneagram can
help us do that.

The Enneagram’s 360-Degree View
The Enneagram describes personality types in terms of conscious patterns
of thinking, feeling, and behaving along with their repressed Shadow
aspects. As a result, it is an excellent tool for doing the hardest part of
consciousness work: realizing, owning, and accepting your blind spots.
I attended the first meeting of what would later become the International
Enneagram Association at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, in
1994. At this gathering of Enneagram enthusiasts from all over the world,
Franciscan priest and author Richard Rohr gave an amazing talk in which
he likened the mystic symbol of the Enneagram to the archetypal “Wheel of
Fortune,” which epitomizes life as having inevitable ups and downs. He
observed that Western culture is oriented to the “ascent”—the upside of
things—and therefore has a harder time with the “descent” part of life’s
wheel. Because the Enneagram gives us a way to see our dark sides without
judgment, Rohr said, the Enneagram is an invaluable tool for helping us
accept and manage the descent.
Rohr eloquently expressed a profound truth. Our human (egoic) tendency
is to want to feel good (and to avoid feeling bad) about ourselves. But
without a way of recognizing, accepting, and addressing all of who we are,
including the Shadow side and difficult parts of our experience, our
personal growth stops and we remain asleep to our potential. The
Enneagram reveals the truth of what we might see as the “good” and the
“bad” parts of our habitual programming, allowing us to compassionately
address the disowned and “fixated” (stuck) parts of our personalities and to
embrace ourselves as we truly are.

The Enneagram Personality Map
THE ENNEAGRAM HELPS US IDENTIFY specific patterns of personality and their
accompanying Shadows by describing the habits and traits of twenty-seven
“false selves” in a systematic way. It considers personality according to its
predominant “center of intelligence:” body/physical, heart/emotional, or
head/intellectual. Each of these three centers is then further divided into
three personality types, for a total of nine types.

Grouped according to their centers, the personality types and the
connecting lines between them draw the figure of the ancient mystical
symbol that is the Enneagram diagram. Beyond the three centers and the
nine types is a third level of depth that divides each of the nine Enneagram
types into three distinct sub-personalities, or “subtypes,” based on the
relative emphasis of three basic instincts. The resulting twenty-seven subtypes
are unique personality types based on how each of the nine types are shaped
by the three most central instinctual drives that we all share: SelfPreservation, Social Interaction, and Sexual (or One-to-One) Bonding.

The Three Centers
The wisdom tradition behind the Enneagram holds that humans are “threebrained beings”—that we function through three different “centers of
intelligence.” These centers represent the three modes of perception,
processing, and expression: moving or sensing (kinesthetically), feeling,
and thinking. Each center’s function has its advantages and its
disadvantages—its positive uses and its misuses—ways it helps us interpret
and interact with the world around us, and ways it can steer us off course.

The “body” center includes the “motor” center (Points 8, 9, and 1), which takes an
active part in all physical movement, and the “instinctive center,” which
corresponds to our instinctual functions. When thought initiates movements
within you, your motor center is activated. An impulse from the motor, or
gut, center can be a solid guide to right action, but misuse of the motor
center can also lead to impulsive behavior or inertia.
The “heart” center or “emotional” center (Points 2, 3, and 4) regulates the feeling

function: the experience and expression of emotions. It allows you to feel

your emotions and connect to others through empathy; but overuse (or
misuse) can lead to oversensitivity, insensitivity, or emotional manipulation.
The “head” center or “intellectual” center (Points 5, 6, and 7) regulates the thinking

function: the experience and expression of thoughts, beliefs, and other
cognitive activity. While essential for dispassionate analysis and reasoning,
this form of intelligence can paralyze you if you get caught up in
overanalyzing a situation.

The Nine Personality Archetypes
THE POWER OF THE ENNEAGRAM MAP lies in its highly accurate articulation of
the automatic patterns associated with the personalities it describes. Each
type has a habitual “focus of attention”—its most prominent patterns of
thinking, feeling, and behaving—as well as a central motivating “passion”
or “chief feature.”
The Passions
Each Enneagram personality type is associated with one of nine
“passions,” which point to the central emotional-motivational
issue for each type. The passions are emotional (and often
unconscious) drivers based on an implicit view about what you
need to survive and how you can get it. Because the passions are
motivated by a sense of lack, they create a basic dilemma or trap
around which the personality is organized while striving to meet a
basic need that never gets fulfilled.
Understanding the role of the passions is crucial to grasping the
Enneagram, because they motivate action out of a hunger for
something and yet obstruct us from finding real fulfillment
through getting what we need to satisfy that hunger. This is
because we only obtain what we really need when we transcend
the limited purview of the personality. Only in becoming
conscious of our motivations, can we get out of this cycle that
leads nowhere.2

Body Center Types

Type Nine
Focus of Attention: Nines focus attention on others, on what is going on in the

environment, and on avoiding conflict and achieving harmony. Nines
typically tune into what other people want, but do not have a clear sense of
their own agendas.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Nines focus on getting along with others without

“rocking the boat” and creating conflict. They’re emotionally steady and do
not feel many highs or lows. Though they are anger types, Nines usually
don’t feel their anger very often—they (unconsciously) dissociate from it as
a way to avoid conflict or separation from others—so it tends to leak out in
repressed forms, such as stubbornness or passive-aggressive behavior, or
escape in big bursts every once in a while.
Behavior Patterns: Nines like to “go with the flow,” and they automatically

accommodate the agendas of others as a way of unconsciously avoiding
expressing (or even registering) any preferences that could lead to conflict,
though they may passively resist later when hints of latent desires surface.
They dislike feeling controlled, but like structure and clear lines of
authority. They make good mediators because they have an easy ability to
see all sides of an issue and naturally find the common ground in
conflicting points of view.
Passion—Laziness: Laziness refers to an inaction of the psyche, a refusal to see,

a resistance to change, and an aversion to effort, especially with regard to
being aware of their own inner feelings, sensations, and desires. Rather than
reluctance to take action, this passion is more about inattention to self and
inertia of the will when it comes to tuning in to what is going on internally.

Type Eight
Focus of Attention: Eights naturally focus their attention on power and control—

who has it and who doesn’t, and how it’s wielded. They think in terms of
the big picture and (mostly) dislike dealing with details. They see the world
as being divided into “the strong” and “the weak,” and they identify with
“the strong” to avoid feeling weak.

Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Emotionally, Eights usually have easy access to

anger and (unconsciously) avoid registering vulnerable feelings. They
typically appear fearless and can be intimidating to others, often without
meaning to be. They like to be in control, engage in black and white
thinking, think they know what’s best or true, and do not like to be told
what to do.
Behavior Patterns: Eights have a lot of energy, can accomplish big things, can

confront others when necessary, and will protect people they care about.
They can be workaholics, taking on more and more without acknowledging
their physical limits, and refuse to experience vulnerable feelings that might
slow them down. They can sometimes overwork themselves, even to the
point of physical illness.
Passion—Lust. Lust is a passion for excess and intensity in all manner of

stimulation. It is a drive to fill up an inner emptiness through physical
gratification. Lust in Enneagram terms is “a passion for excess or an
excessive passionateness to which sexual gratification is only one possible
source of gratification.”3

Type One
Focus of Attention: Like the “superego” function of Freud’s model, Ones focus

on noticing error (in the form of deviations from an internally generated
ideal), discerning right and wrong, and displaying a reliance on rules and
structure.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Emotionally, Ones often feel resentment and

irritation or anger that is restrained. The communication of aggression is in
conflict with their belief that expressing anger is bad, so anger and other
instinctual impulses are typically held back and then leak out as resentment,
annoyance, criticism, and self-righteousness. Ones believe that there is a
“right way” to do things and that we should all try to be more perfect.
Behavior Patterns: Ones can be perceived as being rigid and highly structured in

their behavior, relying on ritual and repetitive forms of doing. Typically,
they follow the rules and are reliable, ethical, and hardworking.

Passion—Anger: As an emotional passion, anger appears in its repressed form

for Ones as resentment that seeks resolution in pursuing perfection and
virtue. Ones display hostility toward the imperfect way things are and try to
force things to conform to their ideal of how things should be.

Heart Center Types
Type Three
Focus of Attention: Threes focus attention on tasks and goals to create an image

of success in the eyes of others. Threes identify with their work, believing
they are what they do, and lose touch with who they really are.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: For a Three, thinking centers on “doing”—on

accomplishing tasks and goals. Though a heart type, Threes (unconsciously)
avoid their feelings because getting caught up in emotion prevents them
from getting things done. When they slow down enough for emotions to
surface, they may feel a sense of sadness or anxiety related to being
recognized for what they do and not for who they are. Threes tend to
express impatient anger if someone or something gets between them and
their goal.
Behavior Patterns: Threes tend to be fast-paced workaholics. They find it very

difficult to slow down and just “be.” They can be extremely productive and
effective because of their laser-like focus on getting things done and
reaching their goals.
Passion—Vanity: Vanity is a passionate concern for one’s image or for “living
for the eyes of others.”4 Vanity motivates Threes to present a false image to

others—to shape-shift into whatever image is the right or most successful
image for the context.

Type Two
Focus of Attention: Twos focus on relationships, gaining approval, and seducing

others through helpfulness as a strategic way to get their disowned needs
met. Twos actively “read” the people around them and align with (what

they perceive to be) their moods and preferences in order to maximize the
potential for positive connection.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Emotionally, Twos fear rejection and so they

frequently repress their feelings in an effort to please others. When their
emotions can no longer be repressed, they may display anger, sadness,
anxiety, or hurt. Because of these contradictory impulses, Twos may feel
emotionally conflicted. Twos also express happy feelings as a way of
appearing likable to others.
Behavior Patterns: Twos tend to be upbeat, energetic, and friendly, though

sometimes this can mask (and be an overcompensation for) repressed needs
and a tendency toward depression. They are driven and hardworking,
especially in the service of others or a project they feel passionately about,
but they can also be hedonistic and self-indulgent. Twos may also play the
role of martyr, sacrificing their own needs and desires to win over others,
but then suffering for it.
Passion—Pride: In the language of the Enneagram, pride functions as a need for

self-inflation and gets expressed as a false generosity in the service of
seduction and self-elevation. Pride also fuels a pattern of self-idealization
and grandiosity, followed by a reactive devaluation and self-criticism.

Type Four
Focus of Attention: Fours focus attention on their own feelings, the feelings of

others, and interpersonal connection and disconnection. They feel a sense of
deficiency about their own worth, so they seek idealized experiences of
qualities they perceive as outside themselves.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Fours value authentic expressions of a wide range

of emotion. Their thought patterns center on what is missing in a given
situation and on longing for whatever they perceive as ideal and somehow
unavailable. They appreciate meaningful interactions rooted in real feelings
and have a keen aesthetic sensibility based on the translation of emotional
experience into artistic expression, but they tend to overidentify with
feelings and dwell in melancholy (or anger).

Behavior Patterns: Fours can be reserved and withdrawn, or energetic and

active, or both. They are emotionally intuitive, empathic, and intense. While
specific behavior patterns vary according to subtype, Fours generally aren’t
afraid of conflict, will work tirelessly when they feel passionately
connected to something, and can see what’s missing and speak to it.
Passion—Envy: Envy manifests as a painful sense of lack and a craving toward

that which is felt lacking. For Fours, Envy grows out of an early sense of
loss that leads to a perception that something good is outside the Four’s
experience—and that this something is necessary but missing because of an
inner deficiency.

Head Center Types
Type Six
Focus of Attention: Sixes focus on thinking about what might go wrong and

strategizing and preparing for it. A response to an early experience of
danger, Sixes have an adaptive strategy that centers on detecting threats and
coping with fear.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: It’s hard to talk about one kind of Six, because the

three Six subtypes are so distinct. This can be traced to the three commonly
understood ways of dealing with fear: fight, flight, or freeze. Analytical and
strategic in their thinking, Sixes think in terms of how to manage
uncertainty to feel safe. They think things through thoroughly, even to the
point of getting paralyzed by overanalysis. Aside from fear, they tend to
have less access to other feelings, though they can be the most feeling of the
Head Types.
Behavior Patterns: Sixes are watchful and alert in different ways, and share a

common orientation to authority. They have a strong desire for a good
authority, but can be suspicious of and rebellious against real-life
authorities. Sixes are thoughtful and loyal to those whom they trust. They
can be hard workers, intent on control and achievement, or they can have a
hard time getting things done, getting caught up in procrastination,
indecision, and fear of success. Their constant awareness of what might go
wrong makes them excellent problem-solvers.

Passion—Fear: Fear is an unpleasant emotional and physiological response to

recognized sources of danger; it usually goes hand in hand with anxiety,
which can be more or less conscious, depending on the subtype. Anxiety
includes apprehension, tension, or uneasiness related to the anticipation of
danger, the source of which is unknown or unrecognized and may originate
inside one’s own mind.

Type Five
Focus of Attention: Fives believe knowledge is power, so they like to observe

what’s going on around them without getting too involved, especially
emotionally. They focus on accumulating information about subjects that
interest them and managing their time and energy, which they perceive as
scarce, by avoiding entanglements with others.
Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Fives live in their heads and habitually detach

from their emotions. They are sensitive to emotional demands being placed
on them. They typically have a narrow range of feeling and almost never
show their emotions in public.
Behavior Patterns: Fives are reserved and introverted, need a lot of time alone,

and avoid interactions with people who (they fear) might deplete them.
They are very analytical and objective, and they tend to spend a lot of time
pursuing their intellectual interests.
Passion—Avarice: Avarice is a holding back and holding in—the hoarding of

time, space, and resources out of fear of impending impoverishment. It’s
not so much greediness as retentiveness, a “drive to hold on to what [they]
already have rather than [a] drive to acquire more.”5

Type Seven
Focus of Attention: Sevens avoid unpleasant feelings by focusing on what feels

pleasant and by keeping the mood upbeat to the point of reframing
negatives into positives. A fear of being trapped in discomfort fuels quick
thinking, creative problem-solving, and a focus on positive future
possibilities.

Patterns of Thinking and Feeling: Sevens have quick, synthesizing minds, with

which they find links between the commonalities in different subjects,
making rapid mental associations. Emotionally, Sevens like feeling happy
or joyful emotions and dislike feeling fear, anxiety, sadness, boredom, pain,
or discomfort. Their attitude is, “Why feel pain if you can feel happy
instead?”
Behavior Patterns: Sevens

are energetic, fast-paced, innovative, and active.
They usually have many interests and activities, which they pursue with
enthusiasm. Sevens like planning for fun and maintaining many options, so
they can keep their mood up and shift to the most pleasant option if one
plan becomes undesirable or untenable.
Passion—Gluttony: While we commonly think of gluttony in connection with

food and eating too much, in the language of the Enneagram, gluttony is a
passion for pleasure and a desire for more—an excessive indulgence in
consuming whatever brings pleasure.

The Twenty-Seven Subtypes6
SUBTYPES EXIST WITHIN EACH of the nine types, broken down into three
distinct versions according to how the passion of each type combines with
one of three instinctual biases or goals that all social creatures share, directed
either toward Self-Preservation, Social Interaction, or Sexual (or One-to-One) Bonding.
When the passion and the dominant instinctual drive come together, they
create an even more specific focus of attention, reflecting a particular
insatiable need that drives behavior. These subtypes thus reflect three
different “subsets” of the patterns of the nine types that provide even more
specificity in describing the human personality.

Our Animal Drives: The Three Instinctual Goals
Self-Preservation: The Self-Preservation instinct focuses attention on and shapes

behavior around issues related to survival and material security. It generally
directs energy toward safety and security concerns, including having
enough resources, avoiding danger, and maintaining a basic sense of
structure and well-being. Beyond these basic concerns, the self-preservation
instinct may place emphasis on other areas of security in terms of whatever

that means for a person of a specific type (once it mixes with one of the
nine passions).
Social Interaction: The Social instinct focuses attention on and shapes behavior

around issues related to belonging, recognition, and relationships in social
groups. It drives us to “get along with the herd”—our family, the
community, and the groups we belong to. This instinct also relates to how
much power or standing one has relative to the other members of “the
group” in terms of whatever that might mean for a person of a specific type.
Sexual Bonding: The Sexual instinct focuses attention on and shapes behavior

around issues related to the quality and status of relationships with specific
individuals. Sometimes referred to as the “One-to-One” instinct, it generally
directs energy toward the achievement and maintenance of sexual
connections, interpersonal attraction, and bonding. This instinct seeks a
sense of well-being through one-to-one connections with people in terms of
whatever that means for a person of a specific type.
All three of these instincts operate in all of us, but usually only one is
dominant in each individual—and when the powerful biological drive of
that dominant instinct is put in service of the “passion,” it fuels a more
specific expression of the personality, resulting in a more nuanced character
(a subtype) of the main personality type.
The Countertypes
For each of the nine types, there is a “countertype” subtype. In
every case, with each of the nine points of the Enneagram, there
are two subtypes that go with the flow of the energy of the
passion and there is one that is upside-down: one that doesn’t
look like the others and goes against the main energetic direction
of the passion. This “counter-passional” type is called the
“countertype” of the three subtypes. For example, the “counterphobic” Sexual Six is the most well known of the countertypes.
It’s a Six who’s unafraid. The passion of the Six is Fear, but the
Sexual subtype goes against fear by being strong and intimidating
as a way of coping with fear.7

The Subtypes in Brief
The brief descriptions of the subtype personalities that follow provide an
overview of this third level of the Enneagram’s structure and highlight two
important aspects of subtype: the movement from center to passion to
instinct that defines each personality, and the “countertype” of each of the
type’s group of three subtypes. We will explore each of these personalities
in greater depth in the proceeding chapters.

Body Center Subtypes
Nines
Self-Preservation Nine: “Appetite”

Instead of feeling an ongoing connection to their feelings, desires, and
power, Self-Preservation Nines focus on merging with physical comforts
and routine activities, such as eating, sleeping, reading, or doing crossword
puzzles. SP Nines are practical, concrete people who focus on everyday
things rather than abstractions.
Social Nine: “Participation” (countertype)

Social Nines fuse with groups. They act out laziness when connecting with
their own inner life by working hard to be a part of the different groups in
their lives. Fun-loving, sociable, and congenial characters, Social Nines can
be workaholics, prioritizing the group’s needs above their own. This high
level of activity makes them the countertype of the three Nine subtypes.
Sexual Nine: “Fusion”

Sexual Nines express the passion of laziness by merging with the important
people in their lives. Sexual Nines unconsciously take on the attitudes,
opinions, and feelings of others, because it can feel too hard to stand on
their own. These Nines tend to be kind, gentle, shy characters who are not
very assertive.

Eights
Self-Preservation Eight: “Satisfaction”

Self-Preservation Eights express the passion of lust through a focus on
getting what they need for survival. SP Eights have a strong desire for the

timely satisfaction of material needs and an intolerance for frustration. SP
Eights know how to survive in difficult situations and feel omnipotent when
it comes to getting what they need. They are the least expressive and the
most armed of the three Eight subtypes.
Social Eight: “Solidarity” (countertype)

Social Eights express lust and aggression in the service of others. A social
antisocial person, this is the countertype of the Eights, a helpful Eight who
appears less aggressive and more loyal than the other two Eight subtypes.
The name “Solidarity” emphasizes their tendency to offer help when people
need protection.
Sexual Eight: “Possession”

Sexual Eights express lust through rebellion and the need to possess
everyone’s attention. Sexual Eights are intense, charismatic characters who
want to have control and influence. Instead of seeking material security,
they try to get power over things and people. The name “Possession” refers
to an energetic takeover of the whole scene—a need to feel powerful
through dominating the whole environment.

Ones
Self-Preservation One: “Worry”

Self-Preservation Ones are the true perfectionists of the three Ones. They
express the passion of anger through working hard to make themselves and
the things they do more perfect. In this subtype, anger is the most repressed
emotion; the defense mechanism of reaction formation transforms the heat
of anger into warmth, resulting in a friendly and benevolent character.
Social One: “Non-adaptability”

Social Ones (unconsciously) consider themselves to be perfect; they express
anger through focusing on being the perfect model of “the right way” to be.
They have a teacher mentality that reflects an unconscious need for
superiority. In the Social One, anger is half-hidden—there’s a
transformation of the heat of anger into cold. This is a cooler, intellectual
personality type in which the main theme is control.
Sexual One: “Zeal” (countertype)

Sexual Ones focus on perfecting others; they are more reformers than
perfectionists. The only One who is explicitly angry, they act out anger
through their intense desire to improve others and get what they want. They
feel entitled in the way a reformer or a zealot can feel entitled: they believe
they have a right to change society and get what they want because they
have a higher understanding of the truth and the reasons behind “the right
way to be.” The countertype of the Ones, they are more impulsive and
outwardly angry—they go against the “counter-instinctive” tendency of the
One to repress anger and impulses.

Heart Center Subtypes
Threes
Self-Preservation Three: “Security” (countertype)

The Self-Preservation Three has a sense of vanity for having no vanity. This
Three also wants to be admired by others, but avoids openly seeking
recognition. Not just satisfied with looking good, the SP Three strives to be
good. They are determined to be a good person—to match the perfect
model of how a person should be. Being the perfect model of quality
implies virtue, and virtue implies a lack of vanity. SP Threes seek a sense of
security through being good, working hard, and being effective and
productive.
Social Three: “Prestige”

Social Threes focus on achievement in the service of looking good and
getting the job done. They act out vanity through their desire to be seen and
have influence with people. They enjoy being on stage in the spotlight.
Social Threes know how to climb the social ladder and achieve success.
These are the most competitive and most aggressive of the Threes. They
have a driving need to look good and possess a corporate or sales mentality.
Sexual Three: “Charisma”

Sexual Threes focus on achievement in terms of personal attractiveness and
supporting others. In this Three, vanity is not denied (as in the SP Three)
nor embraced (as in the Social Three), but is somewhere in between: it’s
employed in the service of creating an attractive image and promoting
important others. These Threes have a harder time talking about themselves

and often put the focus on others they want to promote. They put a lot of
energy into pleasing others and they have a family/team mentality.

Twos
Self-Preservation Two: “Privilege” (countertype)

Self-Preservation Twos “seduce” like a child in the presence of grown-ups
as a way of (unconsciously) inducing others to take care of them. Everyone
likes children, and the SP Two adopts a youthful stance as a way of getting
special treatment well beyond childhood. As the countertype, it’s less easy
to see pride in this Two because they are more fearful of and ambivalent
about connecting with others. The title “Privilege” reflects this Two’s desire
to be loved and prioritized just for being who they are, not for what they
give to others. Related to the youthful stance, these Twos are playful,
irresponsible, and charming.
Social Two: “Ambition”

The Social Two is a seducer of environments and groups—a powerful,
leader type whose pride manifests as a sense of satisfaction in the conquest
of an audience. This is a more adult Two in whom pride is the most
obvious; the Social Two cultivates an image of being an influential,
supercompetent person worthy of admiration. The name “Ambition”
reflects this person’s desire to “be on top,” and as a result of this lofty
position, receive advantages and benefits. This Two “gives to get” the most
and always has a strategic angle when expressing generosity.
Sexual Two: “Seduction/Aggression”

One-to-One Twos seduce specific individuals as a way of getting needs met
and feeding their pride. Similar to the “femme fatale” archetype (and male
equivalent) this Two employs the methods of classical seduction to attract a
partner who will meet all their needs and give them whatever they want.
The name “Aggressive-Seductive” suggests a character who is appealing,
but who also wants to wield some power. Energetically like a force of
nature, this is a person who becomes irresistible, who inspires great
passions and positive feelings as a way to meet needs in life.

Fours
Self-Preservation Four: “Tenacity” (countertype)

The Self-Preservation Four is long-suffering. As the countertype of the
Fours, SP Fours are stoic in the face of their inner pain and they don’t share
it with others as much as the other two Fours. This is a person who learns to
tolerate pain and to do without as a way of earning love. Instead of dwelling
in envy, SP Fours act out their envy by working hard to get what others
have and they lack. More masochistic than melodramatic, these Fours
demand a lot of themselves, have a strong need to endure, and have a
passion for effort.
Social Four: “Shame”

The Social Four suffers more, feels more shame, and is more sensitive than
the other two Fours. Envy fuels a focus on shame and suffering as they
employ a strategy of seducing others into meeting their needs through an
intensification of pain and suffering. They experience a sense of comfort in
feeling melancholy. Envy also manifests in lamenting too much, taking on
the victim role, and focusing on a sense of their own inferiority. Social
Fours don’t compete with others as much as they compare themselves to
others and find themselves lacking.
Sexual Four: “Competition”

Sexual Fours make others suffer as an unconscious way of trying to rid
themselves of painful feelings of deficiency. In denying their suffering and
being more shameless than shameful, they express their needs more and can
be demanding of others. In seeking to be the best, they express envy in its
manifestation as competition. They express “an envy that wants,”
unconsciously turning their pain at inner lack into feelings of anger about
not getting what they need from others.

Head Center Subtypes
Sixes
Self-Preservation Six: “Warmth”

Self-Preservation Sixes express the passion of fear through a need for
protection, for friendship, and for banding together with others. In seeking
protective alliances, SP Sixes endeavor to be warm, friendly, and
trustworthy, which is why they bear the name “Warmth.” This most
“phobic” of the Sixes has difficulty expressing anger, feels uncertain, and

engages in a lot of self-doubt. For SP Sixes, fear manifests as insecurity,
and they focus on relationships as a way of feeling safer in the world.
Social Six: “Duty”

Social Sixes express fear through a need to deal with anxiety by relying on
abstract reason or ideologies as a frame of reference. Obeying authority
through knowing what the rules are helps them to feel safe in the world.
Unlike the SP Six, this Six has more certainty and can be “too sure” of
things as a way of dealing with the anxiety of uncertainty. Social Sixes
focus on precision and efficiency. They adhere to whatever the guidelines
are as form of having a protective authority.
Sexual Six: “Strength/Beauty” (countertype)

Sexual Sixes express fear by going against fear—by becoming strong and
intimidating. Trusting themselves more than others, these Sixes have the
inner programming that when you are afraid, the best defense is a good
offense. They take on a powerful stance, both in what they do and how they
look, as a way of holding the enemy at a distance. Their anxiety is allayed
through skill and readiness in the face of an attack.

Fives
Self-Preservation Five: “Castle”

The Self-Preservation Five expresses avarice through a focus on boundaries
—a need to be “encastled” in a sanctuary where they feel protected from
intrusion and have control over their boundaries. SP Fives have a passion
for being able to hide behind walls and know that they have everything they
need to survive within those walls. They are the least expressive of the three
Fives and they try to limit their needs and wants so that they can avoid
being dependent on others.
Social Five: “Totem”

The Social Five expresses avarice through a need for “super-ideals,”
relating to others with common interests through knowledge and shared
values (rather than emotional connection). In this Five, avarice is connected
to knowledge. Needs for people and for the sustenance that relationships
provide get channeled into a thirst for information. “Totem” refers to a
passion for high ideals, the need to idealize experts and seek knowledge
connected to whatever ultimate values this Five adheres to. Social Fives

engage in a search for the ultimate meaning to avoid experiencing life as
meaningless.
Sexual Five: “Confidence” (countertype)

Sexual Fives express avarice through a search for ideal exemplars of
absolute love. This is a Five with a romantic streak. The name reflects their
need to find a partner who fulfills an ideal of trust. The most emotionally
sensitive of the Fives, they suffer more, resemble Type Four more, and have
more overt desires. They have a vibrant inner life that may be expressed
through artistic creation but are still cut off from others in many ways.

Sevens
Self-Preservation Seven: “Keepers of the Castle”

The Self-Preservation Seven expresses gluttony through making alliances
and creating opportunities for gaining an advantage. Pragmatic and selfinterested, these Sevens find safety through networking and being alert to
opportunities that support their survival. The name “Keepers of the Castle”
refers to their way of establishing a partisan network of allies through
which they create safety and satisfy their needs. Cheerful and amiable, they
have a love of pleasure and tend to get what they want.
Social Seven: “Sacrifice” (countertype)

As the countertype, Social Sevens go against gluttony through
conscientious efforts to be of service to others. Conscious of wanting to
avoid exploiting others, they have a need to be good and pure and to
sacrifice their own needs in supporting the needs of others. They have a
passion for being seen as good for the sacrifice of their own desires. They
express an ascetic ideal and make a virtue of getting by on little. They
express idealism and enthusiasm as a way of making themselves feel active
and valued in the world.
Sexual Seven: “Suggestibility”

Sexual Sevens express gluttony through a need to imagine something better
than ordinary reality. Gluttons for things of a higher world, they are
idealistic dreamers with a passion for living in their imaginations. Sexual
Sevens look at things with the optimism of someone who is in love; they
see the world through rose-colored glasses. “Suggestibility” refers to being
somewhat naive and easy to hypnotize. Light-hearted and enthusiastic, they

focus on exciting possibilities and pleasurable fantasies, and they believe
they can do everything.

Charting Your Personal Growth Path
A QUESTION THAT USUALLY ARISES after people identify their Enneagram type
is “Now what?” Once you know your type and subtype, what do you do
with that information to create positive change? This is the most powerful
aspect of the Enneagram: it’s a model of transformation that indicates a path
for growth.
By first remembering to observe the things we do; then inquiring more
deeply into why and how we do the things we do; and eventually actively
working against our old habits and toward our higher aspects, we initiate an
ongoing learning process focused on knowing ourselves better to the point
where we can make more conscious choices more regularly.
The first step along this journey of inner growth is about self-observation as
the path to dis-identifying from your personality. Self-observation is about creating
space. When you can observe your personality’s patterns in action, you
make room inside yourself to see what you think, feel, and do from more of
a distance, with more objectivity. This allows you to witness your key
habitual patterns as they are happening. In these sections I will highlight
specific patterns for each type to observe in themselves.
The second step along this growth path is to look more deeply into what
you are doing through self-inquiry and self-reflection. Self-inquiry is about
understanding both the root causes and the consequences of the patterns you
observe. I help you to start this process by identifying what I see as each
type’s “key issues” and offering ideas about “what to do” to address those
issues.
The third task connected with this model is self-development. Selfdevelopment involves actively working to achieve change. Through
observing and understanding your personality’s key patterns, you have the
power to overcome your defensive habits and do things differently. Having
awareness about your central patterns, their sources, and their consequences
makes it possible to make new choices because you are no longer caught up
in unconscious, automatic actions and reactions.
In this last section of each of the archetype chapters, I offer type-based
guidance in terms of two distinct “Enneagramatic paths” of transformation:
1) the Inner Flow of the change process following the arrow lines within the

diagram, and 2) the vertical “Vice to Virtue” path of development:
understanding your “Vice” (the unconscious operation of the passion) so
that you can work toward embodying your higher “Virtue” (the antidote for
the passion).

To make the Inner Flow a clearer outline for self-work, I offer my own
theory of how to use this map. 8 In short, I believe the Enneagram’s arrow
lines point in the direction of each type’s specific path of psychological and
spiritual growth and away from important characteristics and experiences
we had to repress in childhood (but periodically return to for a sense of
security). These connection points indicated by the Enneagram diagram
help us see how we can aim to embody the higher aspects of these two
specific points to further our inner journey: the point ahead of our core point
represents key challenges we need to master to become more whole and the
point behind our core type along the arrow lines represents issues from the past
that we need to re-integrate such that we can reclaim what we disowned in
childhood to ground and support our forward movement along the path
indicated by the arrows.

***
By seeing the point ahead of our core point along the arrow lines as not
only a “stress” or “defensive” point that we get driven to in distress, but a
key opportunity for growth through meeting the specific challenges
represented by that point, I highlight the ways we can expand our capacities
through consciously seeking to manifest the high side qualities of what I
call our “growth-(through)-stress” or “stress-growth” point. By seeing what

has been called the “security” or “heart” point (the point behind our core
point along the arrow lines that I am calling the “child-heart” point) as a
point that represents parts of ourselves we had to leave behind in childhood
(but occasionally return to in times of stress or security as a resource) I
suggest ways in which we can more consciously re-own these aspects to
support our growth. In these ways, I seek to clarify this Inner Flow map in
the “self-development” sections, and suggest how each type can take
advantage of these avenues of growth.

***
Lastly, I will highlight the “Vice to Virtue” path that takes us from living
under the sway of the passion (or vice) of the personality toward manifesting
a greater realization of the higher virtue for each type, which functions as an
“antidote” to the emotional passion. I will also provide suggestions for each
subtype’s more specific tasks on this Vice to Virtue journey toward the true
self.

Conclusion
MY HOPE IS THAT BY UNDERSTANDING the nature and function of your
personality and the steps required to expand beyond it, you can envision
and enact a path of conscious self-liberation. If we can see the personality
not as all of who we are but as a necessary survival mechanism, we can rise
above this “lower self” and embody our higher capacities. If we have the
courage to be honest with ourselves about the things we know we do, the
things we avoid knowing we do, and the adaptive strategies that ultimately
limit us, we can begin to take part in what author Cynthia Bourgeault calls
“the dance of self-manifestation” that is the “cosmic task entrusted to us as
human beings.”9 If we can recognize the Shadow cast by our personality,
consciously bear the suffering we normally defend against, and accept all of
who we are, we can open up endless possibilities for ourselves. The next
chapter tells more of the story of the wisdom tradition behind the
Enneagram and how it communicates this profound map of personal
evolution.

CHAPTER 2

The Enneagram as a Universal Symbol of an
Ancient Teaching:
The Perennial Wisdom View of the Human Purpose
Wisdom is an ancient tradition, not limited to one particular religious
expression but at the headwaters of all the great sacred paths. From
time immemorial there have been Wisdom schools, places where men
and women have been raised to a higher level of understanding…
Wisdom has flowed like a great underground stream from these
schools, providing guidance and nurturance, as well as occasional
sharp course corrections, to the flow of human history.
—Cynthia Bourgeault, The Wisdom Way of Knowing

MANY WHO WRITE ABOUT THE STATE of humanity today point out that at this
moment in history, we suffer from a crisis of meaning. We strive to get
more money or more status or more inner peace, but the things that are
supposed to make us happy often leave us feeling empty. For all our
affluence, we find it hard to connect to deeper experiences of truth that can
help us know, love, and accept ourselves and others and understand our role
in the human collective and the universe.
The wisdom teaching behind the Enneagram conveys a powerful vision
and highly effective path for human growth because it comes out of a
universal understanding of human purpose and possibility. This body of
knowledge can be found in the root teachings of all the world’s major
spiritual traditions, as well as in many ancient philosophical teachings, and
it communicates a view and process of human transformation that religious
studies scholar Huston Smith has described as the “forgotten truth” of
“human unanimity.” It begins with the injunction to “Know Thyself,” and it
provides a map that can direct us in this crucial project.

Smith argues that this perennial wisdom provides a “pattern” or “model
of reality” that we need today to orient ourselves in the world and gain a
sense of confidence about who we are. The Enneagram provides a visible
geometric model of the unity of the common messages underlying the
world’s religions and the wisdom tradition they represent. Smith looks to
the same tradition I am highlighting here and finds “a viable pattern for our
time.”1
In this chapter I sketch out elements of this ancient wisdom as it is
communicated through the structure and symbolic meaning of the
Enneagram, so that we can use it as a pattern for orienting ourselves in the
world. When I refer to the “ancient wisdom behind the Enneagram,” I am
specifically talking about the perennial philosophy as Aldous Huxley
defines it: a metaphysical philosophy and a practical psychology that “finds
something in the soul similar to, even identical with, divine Reality”2 and
points the way to manifesting our potential.
Though we have lost touch with it in recent times, this perennial wisdom
has been repeated over and over for centuries. The Enneagram is just one of
the forms in which it has been encoded for future generations. By exploring
the meaning of this knowledge—both as it is symbolized in the Enneagram
and in its other forms—we can use it in everyday life to reduce our
anxieties and increase our sense of meaning and purpose.

The Perennial Wisdom Teaching Expressed by the Enneagram
FOR EACH OF US, the path of personal transformation starts with the effort to
know ourselves: the call to see beyond the limited patterns and closed
perspectives we have relied on for so long. Author Cynthia Bourgeault
presents an instructive parable in her book The Wisdom Way of Knowing that
captures the essence of what this ancient knowledge tradition says to us
about us:
Once upon a time, in a not-so-far-away land, there was a kingdom of
acorns, nestled at the foot of a grand old oak tree. Since the citizens of
this kingdom were modern, fully Westernized acorns, they went about
their business with purposeful energy; and since they were midlife,
baby-boomer acorns, they engaged in a lot of self-help courses. There
were seminars called “Getting All You Can out of Your Shell.” There
were woundedness and recovery groups for acorns who had been

bruised in their original fall from the tree. There were spas for oiling
and polishing those shells and various acornopathic therapies to
enhance longevity and well-being.
One day in the midst of this kingdom there suddenly appeared a knotty
little stranger, apparently dropped “out of the blue” by a passing bird.
He was capless and dirty, making an immediate negative impression
on his fellow acorns. And crouched beneath the oak tree, he
stammered out a wild tale. Pointing upward at the tree, he said, “We…
are…that!”
Delusional thinking, obviously, the other acorns concluded, but one of
them continued to engage him in conversation: “So tell us, how would
we become that tree?” “Well,” he said, pointing downward, “it has
something to do with going into the ground …and cracking open the
shell.”
“Insane,” they responded. “Totally morbid! Why, then we wouldn’t be
acorns anymore.”3
This “acornology” story spells out our human situation according to the
wisdom tradition behind the Enneagram specifically and the perennial
philosophy generally. Before we do the conscious work of selfdevelopment, we are the seeds of what we may become. To transform from
our “acorn-self” into our “oak tree–Self,” we must traverse our underground
territory—allow our defenses to crack open and break down—and
consciously integrate our disowned feelings, blind spots, and Shadow traits
so that we can shake off the limiting outer shell of our personality and grow
into all that we are meant to be. Nature brings us part of the way, but to
fully manifest our potential, we need to make conscious efforts to grow—
and the Enneagram can guide us in this transformation.
Knowledge is a function of being, so to make the improvements in our
world that we so desperately need to make, we must advance our capacity
for consciousness. The perennial philosophy’s vision of human “being” and
its methods for achieving transformation contain a few basic elements,
which I summarize here in terms of the larger vision of our human purpose
and the way to enact that purpose.

The Vision: The Wisdom View of Humanity and the Universe
The cosmic perspective of this ancient wisdom sees each human as
possessing a “divine spark,” an inherent capacity for manifesting a higher
state of being that is interconnected with the rest of the living universe. It
sees human life, nature, and the universe as being ordered by the same laws,
principles, and patterns. By seeing and understanding those patterns, we can
achieve more wholeness within ourselves and find a greater sense of unity
and harmony with the natural world.
As we grow up, we become identified with a “personal ego,” which
represents both a false (acorn) self that is necessary for survival and a
vehicle for the self-work required to realize the fullness of the larger (oak
tree) Self we may become. The perennial wisdom tradition teaches us,
however, that we can create a useful separation between our false self and
the rest of our consciousness through a concerted effort to know and
experience our depths. Through this space between the pure awareness of
our inner witness and the habits of the false self, we may effectively “disidentify” with our personality’s programming and make room for more
conscious choices, which are both directed by and supportive of our higher
(oak tree) Self.
Aldous Huxley expresses this vision in his description of the perennial
philosophy, beginning with the idea “That art thou,” a Sanskrit phrase
central to Hindu thought. “That are thou” is what the roughed-up acorn was
telling the other acorns: they aren’t just acorns; they are potential oak trees.
The idea that there is a part of us that is “That”—the “That” being
something we might call “divine source” or the Tao or the Absolute
Principle of existence—leads to another core idea of this ancient
philosophy: that our human purpose is for each of us to discover this higher
Self for ourselves, to find out (and become) “Who we really are.”

The Way: The Wisdom View of the Process of Human
Transformation Mapped by the Enneagram
The wisdom way to greater freedom, peace, and wholeness starts with an
active effort to know yourself. And, according to this tradition, the path to
self-knowledge necessarily involves discipline and hard work, so you have
to want to do it—you must have the motivation to sustain you through the
process.

The wisdom path involves three basic steps that can be mapped on the
inner diagram of the Enneagram. The first step, symbolized by a core
transformational theme connected to Type Three, is dis-identification from the
Personality through self-observation; the second phase, represented by Type Six, is
surrendering to the fear and emotional suffering associated with loosening ego defenses (so that
you can put down your defenses and integrate your Shadow); and the third
step, symbolized by Type Nine, is actively working toward transcendence and union (so
you can rise above the limited view of the Personality and merge with a
greater sense of wholeness and peace).4

1. Dis-identification from the Personality through self-observation
(the Three point).
In this phase of self-work, meditative practice helps you to still your mind
so that you can more easily create the inner “space” in which to watch
yourself, thereby creating a separation between your witnessing
consciousness and the habits and patterns you observe. Eventually, as you
get better and better at making this kind of reflective space inside yourself,
you will loosen the hold your old habits and patterns have on you such that
you will have the ability to make different choices.
Dis-identifying from the false self’s habitual focus on the desires,
passions, and fixations of our Personality requires us to develop humility
because the Personality wants to stay in charge. But like a machine or
someone who is asleep, your Personality is limited in its ability to act in the
world and can only grow to a point. When you can see this, you can initiate
an effective program of personal development. When you can challenge the
Personality’s control, you begin the process of building up a conscious

center of gravity within you that is the nucleus of your higher or “greater”
or essential Self.

2. Surrendering to the fear and emotional suffering associated with
loosening ego defenses (the Six point).
When you engage in a process of conscious growth and start to dis-identify
with (or challenge the dominance of) your Personality and its defenses, fear
inevitably arises. This next step in the wisdom path of transformation
entails a willingness to feel this fear rather than falling back into the usual
patterns of your Personality (which are kept in place by fear). Allowing
yourself to experience the emotional territory underneath your defenses in a
conscious way enables you to integrate your Shadow (your disowned and
warded-off feelings) and move forward in your evolution.
While we often don’t like to admit it, some level of conscious suffering is
necessarily connected to growth. Truly knowing yourself and transcending
the conditioned Personality means integrating the parts of yourself that you
don’t like or don’t want to see. Like the acorn in the parable, growth toward
your higher Self requires a kind of breaking open so that the shell of the
Personality can be shed and the deeper truth of who you are can emerge.
Fear is an understandable part of becoming less defended and more open,
and it can take many forms—including a resistance to change. This fear
needs to be respected, but it must also be surrendered to, consciously faced,
and worked through so that it doesn’t thwart your ability to grow.
By allowing yourself to recognize your unconscious patterns and feel the
emotions your Personality has helped you avoid, you release the
considerable energy you have been (unconsciously) expending to keep your
defenses in place. But this means experiencing the feelings you have
created buffers against. This is why this wisdom tradition teaches that the
path of growth is hard work and requires much effort and humility. But if
you have the fortitude to feel and discover the meaning behind the deeper
truths and feelings your defenses have been keeping you from, you open up
to the possibility of a whole new way of being.

3. Actively working toward transcendence and union (the Nine
point).

When you can maintain an ongoing practice of self-observation, self-study,
and self-development, you can gradually attain the greater freedom,
connectedness, balance, wholeness, and creativity that come with living
from your higher “Self.” This higher Self represents a more conscious,
integrated state of being that is available to all of us when we do the work
of dis-identifying with the Personality and facing our fear and our pain. We
can experience this higher state of being when we are able to dis-identify
with the Personality and merge with something larger than ourselves
through meditative practice and conscious self-work. As suggested by the
main themes of the “high side” of the Nine point, this opens us up to an
experience of a greater sense of union with our true Self, with others, and
the natural world.
Although our defenses protect us from pain, they also fend off positive
experiences, like receiving love and experiencing true union with others. As
we loosen the defensive grip of the Personality, we become more receptive
to a deeper experience of love and connection, and we develop a greater
ability to call on the strategies and strengths of all nature’s archetypes
instead of just being preoccupied with one way of doing things.
In the chapters that follow, I will explain how the vision and technology
associated with this ancient wisdom tradition come alive in the Enneagram.
As we will discover, the Enneagram symbolizes this wisdom path through
both its message and its mathematical-geometric structure, which expresses
universal laws of nature that show how this ancient vision can be enacted,
and reveal the methods for achieving it.

The Enneagram as Universal Symbol:
The Ancient Wisdom Expressed through the Language of
Mathematics and Sacred Geometry
ACCORDING TO ANCIENT WISDOM TRADITIONS, the cosmic vision of human
transformation and the technology for getting there are communicated to us
through universal laws conveyed in the language of archetypes and
mathematics. For ancient philosophers in contact with older forms of
wisdom, arithmetic and geometry expressed archetypal principles that
represented clues to a deeper understanding of the universe. Far from being
just “servants of commerce,” numbers and mathematical principles were
studied in terms of the meaningful recurring patterns they revealed in
nature.

Pythagoras and Plato believed numbers and shapes symbolized divine
principles; for them mathematics was central not only to calculation, but
also to the “deep cosmic canon of [the] design” of nature.5 In ancient
Greece, math was studied as the foundation of all other fields of knowledge,
from philosophy to art to psychology, because these early philosophers saw
symbolic mathematics as providing a “map of our own inner psychological
and sacred spiritual structure.”6 The symbolic power of the Enneagram
comes out of this ancient tradition that views geometry as sacred—as
revealing an archetypal patterning or order that structures the growth
processes of living things, whether it be the petals of a flower, the unfurling
of a fern, the dimensions of a sea shell, or the development of the human
psyche.7

The Symbolic Meaning of the Enneagram
The word “Enneagram” means “drawing of nine,” and the Enneagram
symbol is a nine-pointed star inscribed in a circle. Though its exact origins
remain unknown, the symbol is thought to be thousands of years old. It is
made up of three symbolic forms: the circle (symbolizing “the law of one”
or “unity”), the inner triangle (symbolizing “the Law of Three” or “trinity”),
and the “hexad” (symbolizing “the Law of Seven,” or the steps in a process
as manifest in the octave of the musical scale). The symbol is thus
structured, fundamentally, by the combination of the Law of Three and the
Law of Seven inscribed in a circle or unified whole. The circle symbolizes
eternity, the Law of Three represents creation, and the Law of Seven
suggests cyclic, ordered functioning. Together these symbols communicate
the idea that we live in a universe that is perpetually developing and that
there is an essential unity behind the multiplicity of forms evolving in the
natural world.

The deep significance and power of the Enneagram symbol is reflected in
its expression of naturally occurring patterns in the universe. According to
G. I. Gurdjieff, one of the main sources of information about the
Enneagram, “for the man who is able to make use of it, the enneagram
makes books and libraries totally unnecessary.” Gurdjieff told his students:

“Everything can be included and read in the Enneagram. A man may be quite

alone in the desert and he can trace the Enneagram in the sand and in it read
the eternal laws of the universe.”8 He describes the Enneagram as one of
many symbols designed by ancient spiritual masters to communicate
“objective knowledge” of humankind and the universe over time and
generations.
We often think of modern society as being on the leading edge of human
knowledge, and in many ways it is; but Gurdjieff claimed that we have lost
touch with information about the nature of the universe that was known
long ago. The people who possessed this knowledge looked for ways to
transmit it in forms that would be comprehensible to future generations—in
stories, parables, and diagrams like the Enneagram, which could be
communicated without alteration from one school to another, from one era
to another.9

The Circle and the Law of One
For ancient mathematical philosophers, unity was “a philosophic concept
and a mystic experience expressible mathematically” in the geometric shape
of the circle.10 The circle that encloses the Enneagram diagram, then,
represents unity, wholeness, and the natural order of the universe. The idea
that “all is one,” or that there is an underlying unity to all things, even when
we can’t perceive it, is conveyed by the fact that when any number is
multiplied or divided by one (unity), it remains itself: “Unity always
preserves the identity of all it encounters.”11 The Law of One as represented
by the circle was a metaphor for the cosmic creation process beginning
from a dimensionless center (the point or source) and expanding out equally
in all directions.

***
In addition to symbolizing unity and the cyclical nature of process, the idea
of one as expressed through the circle also communicates something about
enclosure—the boundaries around a specific process or realm. The circle of
the Enneagram, then, can be seen as enclosing the developmental process of
an individual human being. What is inside the circle connotes the finite

nature of the Personality, and all that lies outside the circle is “the infinite”
that lies beyond the comprehension of the conditioned Personality.12

The Inner Triangle and the Law of Three
The triad is the form of the completion of all things.
—From The Theology of Arithmetic

The Enneagram’s “inner triangle” represents the Law of Three. The Law of
Three states that three forces—an active force, a passive force, and a
neutralizing (or reconciling) force—must enter into every kind of creation.
A mundane example is that of a sailboat: the boat is the passive force, the
wind is the active force, and the sail is the neutralizing or reconciling force.
Physicists call this trinity of forces “action, reaction, and resultant.”13
Gurdjieff said that every phenomenon is the manifestation of three forces
—that one or two forces alone cannot produce anything. When we see that
something is stuck in the same place and not coming to fruition or
completion, this is often because a third force is lacking. Until we transcend
our ego-based viewpoint, however, we usually don’t have the perceptual
ability to see the third force at work.
We can begin to see the Law of Three at work in psychological growth if
we look at what is needed for an individual to achieve some sort of change.
Normally, when we have a hard time changing something—stopping
smoking, resolving a conflict, losing weight, changing a relationship
dynamic—it is because we are reacting to what is happening in a habitual,
mechanical way. However, if we can bring a “third force” in, something
besides action and reaction plays a role, and we can make a shift. As
Michael Schneider points out, “opposites are balanced by a third, mediating
element that reconciles a conflict, healing the split of polarity and
transforming separate parts into a complete and successful whole.”14 A
properly chosen third factor synthesizes opposites, creating a relationship
that unifies them.
Just as the circle is the geometric figure that represents “one,” the triangle
is the geometrical representation of the Law of Three. The universal
significance of the Law of Three can be seen in the many “trinities” at the
center of the world’s major spiritual teachings. There are many examples of
threefold gods in ancient mythologies and existing religions. The Hindus
have Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and Shiva the Destroyer; in

Christianity, the “Trinity” is the three “persons” of God: the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit and all that they represent. The Buddha taught that we
get trapped in the endless cycles of life and death by creating karma based
on the three poisons: ignorance or delusion, craving, and aversion. These parallel
the three core points of the enneagram – with unconsciousness or ignorance
being the key theme represented by the Nine point, aversion being the
underlying move of the Six point, and craving or desire being associated
with the Three point. We find many forms of “threefoldness” in the world
as well: the stages of life of birth, life, and death; the three dimensions of
space (length, width, and height) and time (past, present, and future); and
the three primary colors.15

The Enneagram system too has many significant expressions of
“threefoldness.” There are three “brains” or centers of intelligence16 marked
by the three points of the Enneagram’s inner triangle; there are three types
associated with each of the three centers; and there are three subtypes of
each of the nine types. The twenty-seven personalities give us the whole
“psychological Enneagram,” expressed mathematically by “three threes” or
three cubed: 3 x 3 x 3. In addition, there are three main types we can
consciously use in specific ways to bring about change in ourselves: our
core type and the two types connected to our core type by the “inner flow”
arrow lines of the Enneagram diagram.

***
The inner triangle of the psychological Enneagram symbolizes the three
aspects necessary to bring anything into being: an advancing force, a

resisting force, and a reconciling force that mediates between and brings the
first two together. The Three point represents the proactive force (Threes
focus on actively “doing”). The Six point represents the resistant force or
“antithesis” (Sixes tend to resist through questioning, doubting, and
testing). The Nine point is the reconciling force (a key Type Nine
characteristic is the tendency to bring different ideas together to create
harmony and reach a consensus).17

The Hexad and the Law of Seven
Those who are free of the passions
Observe the signs of the making.
Those who see its signs
Yield to its rhythm.
Those who crave the passions
Are blinded to the signs,
And see not the cause but only its effects.
So begins all knowing.
—From Chapter 1, “Origins,” of the Tao Te Ching
by Lao Tzu (translated by David Burke)

While the Law of Three symbolizes how something new comes into being,
the Law of Seven reveals the way things happen in terms of a process or a
sequence of steps. The wisdom tradition behind the Enneagram indicates
that there is a “law of order” distinct from the “law of creation”—that
creation is ordered in a certain way. The Law of Three represents something
created purposely or intentionally, while the Law of Seven describes a
cyclical process of transformation.
Ancient mathematicians considered the number seven to be symbolic of
transformation.18 The Law of Seven can be seen at work in the ancient
Greek philosophers’ belief that the only constant in the universe is change.
Heraclitus famously said that all things are subject to an endless process of
becoming: no one can step twice into the same river.19

The movement along the arrow lines of the Enneagram indicates specific
steps in a cycle of transformation. This flow of the cycle of transformation,
symbolized by the lines of the “hexad” piece of the symbol, charts a process
of change that can be likened to the organic unfolding of natural processes
as expressed in the idea of “The Way” or the Tao as described in the Tao Te
Ching, the main text of Taoism. Personality, then, as represented by the
Enneagram, can be seen as a form of getting stuck or “fixated” at one point
along this natural path of change—a defensive mechanism through which
we protect ourselves, but also resist the natural flow or rhythm of life.

The Significance of Nine
Nine represents the boundary between the mundane and the
transcendental infinite.
—Michael S. Schneider, A Beginner’s Guide to Constructing the
Universe: The Mathematical Archetypes of Nature, Art, and Science

The Enneagram’s circle of nine points can be seen as a boundary between
the finite or the mundane nature of human life (as experienced by the
Personality) and the infinite that lies beyond human consciousness—the
larger reality of the universe that is beyond human comprehension when we
are fixated in the Personality’s limited viewpoint. Nine is the final number
in the base-10 system that has a specific identity. As such, it symbolizes the
highest achievement in a specific endeavor: the utmost boundary.
The ancient Greeks called nine “the horizon.” For them it also
represented that which encloses or binds the essential elements of any event
into a whole. A. G. E. Blake explains that in the Enneagram diagram, “the
apex point 9 is unique” because “it represents the beginning and end of the

cycle…that which gives the form of the whole. It is the source of the
purpose that has to be realized.”20
We can find many correlations between the Enneagram’s nine types and
certain elements of ancient wisdom that are found in different forms of
classic texts.
According to the Kabbalah, for example, the essence of the unknowable
divine is portrayed in a diagram called the “Tree of Life.” This Tree has ten
Sefirot, or numbers that represent divine principles, nine of which correspond
directly to the nine Enneagram archetypes. (The tenth, Keter, is placed above
the Enneagram diagram, as it reflects the Messiah’s soul and so doesn’t
relate to the human Personality.)21
Homer’s epic poem, The Odyssey, is structured in terms of the nine different
“lands” Odysseus visits during his quest to get home after the Trojan War.
Each of these nine lands presents obstacles that Odysseus must overcome if
he is to continue on his journey homeward. This archetypal journey of
homecoming is a metaphor for the inner journey of personal growth toward
“home” or the true self. Amazingly, the characteristics of the nine lands,
and the characters who populate them, parallel exactly the issues and traits
of the nine personalities described by the Enneagram—and Odysseus visits
them in the same order as they appear counterclockwise around the Enneagram.
In this work and in Homer’s The Iliad, a person’s main identifying
characteristic is usually what leads to their undoing. This exactly mirrors
what we will see in the Enneagram’s personality types: each personality’s
greatest “strength” can also be its fatal flaw or most significant obstacle.
Similarly, we find versions of the Enneagram’s nine passions in the
“sins” or unconscious patterns that prevent humans from reaching Heaven
in Dante’s epic poem, The Divine Comedy. The threefold structure of Dante’s
Inferno, Purgatory, and Paradise, and the nine levels in the different sections of the
moral geography of the underworld he constructs, also highlight some of
the same themes mapped by the Enneagram: dis-identification (Inferno),
purification through conscious suffering (Purgatory), and transcendence
(Paradise).

***
The Inferno describes the lessons the main character, Dante the Pilgrim, learns

about the different kinds of “sins,” the unconscious drives of the passions

described by the Enneagram. Dante poetically portrays the nature of the
passions and their consequences in the “underworld”—the “unconscious”
or the Shadow. This classic of Western literature thus explores the human
personality starting with its deepest Shadow aspects. In the type chapters
that follow, examples from the Inferno help illustrate the character and effect
of the passions at the core of the nine types when we don’t make conscious
efforts to become aware of them. These punishments for our unchecked
unconscious drives are exacted in the “underworld” of our unconsciousness,
when we fail to do the work entailed in facing our Shadow sides.

The Modern Rediscovery of the Ancient Wisdom Encoded in
the Enneagram
WHEN I FIRST ENCOUNTERED THE ENNEAGRAM in 1990, I was amazed at the
specificity and precision with which it described me to myself. Like many
people who become interested in the system and fascinated by its accuracy,
I wanted to know where it came from. Learning about the symbol’s origins
has given me a deeper personal understanding of the insights it offers.
One of the modern sources of information about the diagram and a
student of Gurdjieff’s, J. G. Bennett, says that this “cosmic secret of
perpetual self-renewal” was discovered more than four thousand years ago
in Mesopotamia by a brotherhood of wise men and then passed down from
generation to generation.22
The rediscovery of the Enneagram in the last century came about through
the work of three key individuals: G. I. Gurdjieff, Oscar Ichazo, and
Claudio Naranjo. All three presented Enneagram-related ideas to small
groups of students in the context of psychological and spiritual growth
work: Gurdjieff in Russia and Europe beginning in the early 1900s; Oscar
Ichazo starting in Chile in the 1960s; and Naranjo in Berkeley, California,
after studying briefly with Ichazo in 1970.

***
Who were these people and what did they say about the Enneagram and the
knowledge behind it? By briefly exploring the distinct teachings of these
three key sources, we get a better sense of the nature of the lineage of the
ancient wisdom it expresses.

G. I. Gurdjieff
Gurdjieff presented the Enneagram symbol and a practical teaching of selfwork called “The Work” or “The Fourth Way” to students in Russia and
Europe beginning in the early 1900s. He communicated a system of
“hidden” knowledge he said came from many sources, but primarily from
esoteric Christianity. However, Gurdjieff did not connect the Enneagram
symbol to psychological types, other than to discuss the three types of
individuals connected to the three centers of intelligence.
Gurdjieff was born in Russian Armenia around 1866. His father was a
Greek bard and Gurdjieff himself suggested his father had participated in
some way with “an oral tradition stretching back to mankind’s past.”23
When he was still a young man he traveled extensively in the Middle East,
Asia, Egypt, and North Africa, making contact with many diverse secret
societies and hermetic organizations—religious, philosophical, occult,
political, and mystic—that were largely inaccessible to the ordinary
person.24 He eventually began teaching in Russia in 1914.
A controversial figure to this day, part of Gurdjieff’s teaching method
was to obfuscate through his presentation of himself as a way of
challenging people’s usual thinking. He purposefully triggered his students’
habitual Personality reactions to demonstrate the ways in which they were
fixated in mechanical, automatic functioning.
Gurdjieff’s teachings portrayed humankind as living in a kind of waking
sleep. His “Fourth Way” approach held out the possibility of finding a path
out of mechanical functioning through self-knowledge:
It is possible to stop being a machine, but for that it is necessary first
of all to know the machine. A machine, a real machine, does not know itself
and cannot know itself. When a machine knows itself it is then no
longer a machine, at least, not such a machine as it was before. It
already begins to be responsible for its actions.25
Gurdjieff continually stressed the fact that this “work on self” requires
strenuous effort because the mechanical state of the Personality makes
falling back asleep a continual and likely possibility. He taught that the
Personality consists of different ways we buffer ourselves against the reality
of our lives, helping us maintain a kind of illusion about what we can

actually “do” in the world. Through active self-observation and intentional
“self-remembering,” he said, we could eventually evolve beyond the
mechanical state associated with our Personality.
Gurdjieff also said that each person has a “chief feature,” also called the
“passion,” which is central to the operation of the Personality. Likening it to
“an axle around which the ‘false personality’ revolves,”26 Gurdjieff said
that every person’s work consists of “struggling against this chief fault.”
That people have different chief features explains why there can’t be one
general set of rules for human growth: “What is useful for one is harmful
for another. One man talks too much; he must learn to keep silent. Another
man is silent when he ought to talk and he must learn to talk.”27

Oscar Ichazo
The Enneagram of psychological types as it is widely known and used
today comes to us from the work of Oscar Ichazo. Originally from Bolivia,
Oscar Ichazo first taught his program of psychological and spiritual
development in Chile in the 1950s and ’60s. As part of his original work
developing a method of personal transformation, he taught the core ideas of
what we now know as the “Enneagram of personality” under the name
“Protoanalysis,” a process that was designed to bring about human
transformation according to methods based on science, reason, and
rationality.
While Ichazo does not cite many specific sources for his model, other
than to say that he developed it himself, he references Aristotle and neoPlatonism as sources and is thought to have been influenced by his studies
in the near and far East, especially in Afghanistan. He has said that the
knowledge behind his Arica School came to him “from many sources” he
encountered in his specific quest.
Ichazo explains that Protoanalysis “is based on the questions: What is
humankind?; What is the Supreme Good of humanity?; and What is the Truth that gives meaning
and value to human life?”28 He describes his work as scientific in that it does not
ask the participant to have faith in anything, but instead studies, measures,
and analyzes the psyche. In 1978, when asked by an interviewer to explain
what Arica was, he said:
Arica provides a new theory about the psyche; it provides a new
method of scientific comprehension. And because Arica has this

theory about the psyche, it has also evolved a method for making the
psyche fulfilled and clear in the sense of being able to develop its
potential to its fullest, if that is possible. That’s the aim of Arica—by
having the complete and entire knowledge of our psyche, to enable
ourselves to handle our problems faster, easier, and clearer.29
Today, forty years after the founding of Ichazo’s school, his teaching
represents a thoroughly articulated view of the human psyche and its
possible transcendence.
Ichazo’s “Enneagram of Fixations” (as opposed to the many other
“Enneagrams” he uses in the Arica work) describes groupings of
psychological traits that have resulted from some early injury to the psyche
and a corresponding compensation of some kind. In his original system,
Ichazo directed his students to work with their “Fixations,” which he
defined as the points where “our psyche has been wrongly predisposed,” or
focused, based on a lack (or unmet need or trauma) that completely colors
and defines a personality type.30 According to the Arica teaching, each
individual has a core type or “fixation” in each of the three centers of
intelligence. Thus, they describe the personality in terms of a “Trifix” or a
triad of types—one in each center—according to a specific formula in
which they determine which point one is fixated upon in each center. (For
example, my Trifix is 2-7-1.)

***
Like Gurdjieff, Ichazo describes the fixated behavior associated with the
Personality, or ego, as mechanical: “The ego-conditioned behavior has the
appearance of being completely mechanical, or the work of an automaton
whose behavior is dramatically obvious and repetitive.”31

Claudio Naranjo
Claudio Naranjo, a Chilean-born, American-trained psychiatrist, learned the
Enneagram model from Oscar Ichazo when he traveled to Arica, Chile in
1970. After this trip, Naranjo created a group oriented toward psychological
and spiritual development (called SAT, or Seekers After Truth, an allusion
to Gurdjieff’s work) in Berkeley, California. Naranjo asked the members of

this group to keep the Enneagram confidential, but it leaked out and
eventually made its way into the mass market when the first books
describing the Enneagram personality types were published in the late
1980s. 32
In many ways, Naranjo was the ideal person to recognize the meaning of
the Enneagram and bring it to a wider audience. He was a key figure within
the human potential movement in the United States in the 1970s, and he had
worked with Fritz Perls, the founder of Gestalt therapy, a form of existential
psychotherapy that emphasized awareness of the present moment and the
physical body as the key to change. By the time he studied the Enneagram
of Fixations with Ichazo, Naranjo had already developed a deep knowledge
of a wide range of theories and practices associated with personal growth,
including psychoanalytic psychology, existential therapies, Karen Horney’s
personality theory, Gurdjieff’s Fourth Way work, Sufism, and Buddhist
meditation. So, he not only recognized the Enneagram’s usefulness as a
catalyst for growth, he also developed it further, using his own intuitive
understanding to communicate it through the lens of existing psychological
and spiritual approaches to self-development.
Naranjo saw the value of Ichazo’s work and integrated it with his own
broad view of human development, weaving together an even more refined
description of the personalities based on Ichazo’s original “Protoanalytic”
(Enneagram) process. Like Ichazo, he didn’t teach the Enneagram as a
stand-alone tool, but rather as one piece of a more expansive program of
self-work designed to help people understand their patterns and habits and
work to transcend them.
Through his writings, Naranjo communicates the Enneagram as an
overarching theory related to and able to integrate and make sense of many
different theoretical trends in Western psychology and Eastern spiritual
practices. This book is based on Naranjo’s interpretation of the Enneagram
personality types and subtypes. Although he credits Ichazo as the source of
this model, most of the Enneagram content in the many books that have
been published internationally are based most directly on Naranjo’s work.

Conclusion:
Where We Are and Where We Wish to Be
THE SAME BASIC IDEAS of the wisdom tradition encoded in the Enneagram
can be found throughout human history in diverse forms. From philosophic

traditions that explore eternal questions of human existence to Eastern
spiritual texts that define the relationship of humanity to the “ground of
being,” and from epic poetry that portrays our estrangement from ourselves
as the starting point of a journey of homecoming to the insights of Western
psychology, renderings of this knowledge echo throughout recorded history.
The Enneagram represents a model of wholeness: each of the points of
the Enneagram not only describes individual personalities but also
characterizes certain archetypal elements that are universal. Each point also
expresses a range of possibilities—a vertical dimension that indicates an
archetype’s higher aspect of expression when its fixated aspects can be
loosened and transcended, and a lower side that describes a more
unconscious, automatic, “fixated” level of functioning.
Growth, then, as revealed by the perennial philosophy and the
Enneagram map, is a process of observing ourselves, suffering through our
fears and disowned Shadow aspects, and working to manifest our higher
potentials. In the following chapters, which describe each of the
Enneagram’s archetypes and their respective journeys of homecoming, I
trace the development of the Personality, the three different subtype forms it
can take, and the path toward liberation. By identifying ourselves within
this timeless, sacred framework, we can join in this ancient tradition and
contribute to what must be a collective effort to increase the level of human
consciousness.

CHAPTER 3

The Point Nine Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
The opposite of home is not distance, but forgetfulness.
—Elie Wiesel

TYPE NINE REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who seeks to
harmonize with the external environment as a way of staying comfortable
and peaceful, even though this means a loss of contact with their internal
environment. Akin to the meaning behind both “fusion” and “union,” this
archetype’s drive is to maintain a sense of calm and connectedness through
merging with the outside and diminished awareness of the inside.
Type Nines are the prototype for that tendency in all of us to tune out our
own inner knowing as a way of “going with the flow” and “not rocking the
boat.” As discussed in the introduction, this is a basic aspect of our human
condition: we all experience a lessening of consciousness as an attempt to
buffer ourselves from the pains and discomforts of everyday life. We all feel
tempted to take the path of least resistance from time to time. The Nine
archetype represents the model for wanting to stay comfortable, resist
change, and do what’s easiest, even if that means not asserting yourself or
falling asleep to your own priorities as a way of getting along with others.
Nines thus represent the prototype for all the personality types of the
universal human tendency to go on automatic and remain asleep to
ourselves.
The Nine archetype can be seen at the societal level in cultures that put
the collective ahead of the individual, and also in the concept of
bureaucracy. The same underlying principles are at work when large
institutions become resistant to change through an unconscious
maintenance of the status quo, an inability to make creative decisions, and a
disconnection from the original animating principles that might drive
innovation and evolution.

In the Enneagram framework, Type Nines are adaptable, likable, and
easygoing. They specialize in detecting tension and finding ways to mediate
and diffuse conflict. Oriented toward inclusion, consensus, and harmony,
they excel at understanding and valuing different perspectives and
mediating between them to resolve disputes and maintain peace. They are
genuinely caring and unselfish, and their specific “superpower” lies in
providing steadfast support to others in a way that makes everyone around
them feel honored and included.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Nines’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel,” as they can
over-adjust to others and then have a hard time registering their own desires
and asserting their own agendas. They get in their own way by focusing too
much attention on what others want and deferring excessively to the people
around them. By accommodating others and avoiding conflict in order to
achieve comfort, they end up becoming deaf to their own inner voice.
However, when they can learn to wake up to themselves, access their own
internal compass, and initiate action on their own behalf, they can balance
their attention to others with an ability to act in support of themselves.
The Type Nine Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey: The LotusEaters
The Odyssey is a classic story about the importance of
“homecoming” as a metaphor for the inner journey that brings us
“home” to the true self.1 As the hero of The Odyssey, Odysseus’s
central goal is to get home. In the symbolic language of The
Odyssey, home is not only a specific place, but also a state of
being in which we embody our true nature and are recognized for
who we really are. The true self, as “home,” is the “root of all
wanting and choosing.”2
The first place Odysseus and his fleet visit after leaving Troy and
sailing homeward at the end of the Trojan War is the land of the
Lotus-Eaters. The Lotus-Eaters are an easygoing, friendly tribe
who “live on a flowering food” called lotus. They are a pleasant
people, but they have no desires at all; they’ve snuffed them out
with their self-deadening herb. They are unable to choose one
path of action over another because they have fallen asleep to

their guidepost, their “home:” who they really are and what they
are supposed to become. They are stuck at a fork in the road,
unable to choose a direction.
The Lotus-Eaters offer Odysseus’s men lotus, which makes them
“forget the way home.”3 Under the influence of the lotus,
Odysseus’s men want to stay in the Lotus-Eaters’s land. Odysseus
has to find them and take them back to the ship by force, where
he ties them to the rowing benches so they can resume their
journey.
Without the knowledge of what it means to be “at home,” we
don’t have much reason to engage in the difficult journey that
leads to the real self. The Lotus-Eaters exemplify the Nine
archetype of falling asleep to the needs and wants of the true self.
Without the desire to manifest the higher possibilities of who you
are, you lose focus; you can’t locate the motivation to act or the
direction in which to go—there’s nothing to set your compass by.
And without a sense of or a desire for home, it’s easy to want to
simply stay comfortable in “Lotus Land.”

The Type Nine Personality Structure
LOCATED AT THE TOP OF THE ENNEAGRAM, Type Nine belongs to the “bodybased” triad, associated with the core emotion of anger and a focus of
attention related to order, structure, and control. While Eights “overdo” anger
and Ones are at odds with their anger, Nines “underdo” anger. While their
relationship to anger plays a formative role in shaping their personality,
most Nines report not feeling anger very often (though they may erupt on
rare occasions).

We all have the capacity for angry feelings, but Nines habitually avoid
contact with their anger because they focus so much on staying
comfortable, and anger can easily bring them into conflict with others. So,
even though Nines are anger types, they may not have regular contact with
their anger, and it tends to leak out in various forms of passive-aggressive
behaviors. Nines’ focus on order and control takes the form of liking the
support that structure provides and the habit of passively resisting being
controlled by others (often despite seeming to go along).
As body-centered types, Nines sense their environment kinesthetically
and have a primary connection to “gut knowing.” Paradoxically, Nines can
be cut off from their gut instincts. The Nine personality is shaped in a
fundamental way by the habit of “going to sleep” to the ongoing experience
of anger inherent in their body-based center of intelligence.
The body-centered types are also referred to as the “self-forgetting” triad,
in that Types Eight, Nine, and One all tend to “forget” themselves through a
kind of psychological inertia that occurs with regard to their physical needs.
These three types, each for their own reasons, tend to put their needs and
wants in the background, ignoring their practical and physical requirements
for things like rest and relaxation (Eights), play and pleasure (Ones), and
priorities, preferences, and opinions (Nines).

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Nine
Nines often report that they grew up in a family in which their opinions
weren’t heard, in which others were more forceful in expressing their
opinions, or where the best strategy to feeling calm and avoiding upset was
to go along with what others wanted. Through this experience of being
overlooked or overpowered, a Nine learns to specialize in being someone

who is easygoing and accommodating of others, but who, when asked for
an opinion, doesn’t know what he wants and finds it easier to let others
decide.
Nines typically have an unmet need for a satisfying sense of union—a
feeling of belonging or connectedness with others who would see and
affirm the Nine’s individuality. When they were children, Nines may not
have received the attention they needed, and their wishes and preferences
typically weren’t listened to and acted upon. Sometimes the Nine was a
middle child or one of many children, or he may have had a parent who was
forceful in exerting control. Nines often decided as children to resign
themselves to going along with what others want in order to maintain
positive connections with others.
Whatever the individual case, Nines tend to give up on asserting their
desires and adopt a coping strategy that involves forgetting themselves (and
the pain of not getting what they want) and overadjusting to others as a way
of finding peace and avoiding conflict. Nines can’t tolerate conflict because
it seems to them to lead to separation. Relationships are life-sustaining
when we are young, and Nines play the role in the family of mediating
between people to reduce tension and maintain the sense of connection that
feels crucial to their survival.
The Nine coping strategy is thus an overadjustment to others—an
unconscious accommodation of what other people want and a “forgetting”
of what they want—and their attention goes to harmonizing with those
around them rather than asserting themselves. This over-adjustment reflects
their experience that any strong feeling or preference on their part may put
them in conflict with others; at an unconscious level, their personality is set
up to avoid adversarial interactions at all costs. For Nines, the cost of this
tendency is their connection to their own inner experience.
Self-denying behaviors and overadjustment are the Nine’s ways of
creating the merged state they long for with others. They feel pain over
being too much on their own too soon in their development; by staying
connected to outside support, Nines find the comfort they seek.
Mark, a Self-Preservation Nine, describes his childhood situation
and the development of his coping strategy:

He was the youngest of four children. His father was a large,
angry, critical man with a deep voice and a perpetual scowl on
his face, probably a Sexual One. His mother was a Type Nine who
tried to maintain a sense of harmony in the family by taking on
his father’s agenda and preventing his outbursts of anger. Mark
learned early on that there were rules that had to be followed: his
father’s rules. Self-determination and self-expression were
allowed only within the limited constraints of what was
acceptable to his father. To breach those boundaries meant being
the object of his father’s criticism and anger. Mark’s siblings—
one Type One and two Type Nines—also took on their father’s
agenda, and were all too happy to correct their youngest
brother’s behavior, grammar, opinions, and performance. His
father’s anger disturbed him deeply, and he could sense that it
also disturbed his mother. Mark learned early on that preventing
his father from getting angry helped him maintain his connection
to both parents. The easiest way to do that was to go along with
whatever his father wanted.

The Main Type Nine Defense Mechanism: Dissociation
Just as Nines represent the prototype of the universal human tendency to go
to sleep to our own inner experience, their main defense mechanism,
dissociation, is a component of all defense mechanisms as well.
When we are young, the defensive structure of the personality grows up
in response to some sort of pain or discomfort that is too much for our
young psyches to withstand. There are clear advantages to dissociating
when we experience something traumatic or painful: we cut off the pain and
the memory of something that is extremely difficult to endure. The problem
with this defense, however, is that when we use it habitually in situations in
which our survival is not at risk—as a way to buffer ourselves from the
minor discomforts of everyday life—we can lose touch with ourselves
altogether in a way that prevents us from growing.
Sometimes referred to as “narcotization,” the principal way Nines
dissociate from psychological pain or discomfort is through a kind of
dimming of awareness, through putting themselves to sleep in various
ways. Through immersing themselves in one activity or another—reading,
eating, watching TV, or doing crossword puzzles—Nines distract

themselves as a way of avoiding their own feelings, needs, and wants.
Through many different kinds of unconscious maneuvers, including joking
around, talking too much, or focusing on inessentials, Nines water down
their experience of life, their interactions with others, and their contact with
themselves to buffer themselves against the pain of separation, of not being
heard, or of not feeling a sense of belonging.

The Type Nine Focus of Attention
Nines focus their attention on others, on what is going on in the
environment, on avoiding conflict, and on creating harmony. Nines
typically pay attention to what other people want, preferring to go along
with the flow of others’ desires rather than to state their own preferences.
This habit of blending in with their environment allows them to avoid
discomfort and create a kind of defensive (often artificial) peace. But when
our attention focuses on one aspect of our experience, there is also a sphere
of life that we don’t pay attention to: while Nines’ attention is focused
outward on the environment and on other people, they neglect their inner
experience.
Based on the coping strategy of harmonizing with what’s going on
around them, Nines typically pay attention to sensing how people and
environments “feel” in terms of energetic tension vs. calm. They take in
others’ perspectives as their own to avoid disconnection and conflict. As a
result, Nines have a natural talent for mediation because they deeply
understand others’ points of view. They easily focus on the commonalities
between opposing arguments and are motivated by their love of
peacefulness to help people find compromises based on highlighting the
common ground between them.
Having an “other-focused” style of attention, Nines pay a great deal of
attention to what the people around them want, think, and feel, and much
less attention to what they themselves want, think, and feel. The experience
of others is so much in the forefront of their perception that they often
report a sense of not knowing what they want. When questioning a Nine
about something as everyday as “What do you want for dinner?” a typical
reply is, “I don’t know, what do you want?”
As a result of the habit of focusing on others and not on themselves,
Nines can feel that they are unimportant and not worthy of others’ attention.

Other people seem far more prominent, to the point that their own agendas
fade into the background.
It can be so hard for Nines to attend to and find their own inner direction
that at times they can only locate a sense of inner motivation when it is tied
to the wishes of others. I was once in a process group in which everyone
was trying to help a Nine say what he wanted. In every case, with every
effort the group members made to inquire into what he wanted, the answer
was always the same: he wanted what we wanted.
Nines’ attention often gets pulled away from their immediate priorities
by different elements in their environment; they experience difficulty
concentrating because they shift their attention from the center of their
experience to the periphery.4 Other people and less essential tasks can seem
more worthy of attention than their own priorities. Nines also get distracted
in more deliberate ways, “as if driven by a desire not to experience or not to
see.”5 It can be stressful for Nines to act on their own behalf—it can inspire
anxiety about performance—and so they distract themselves with less
important activities as a way of avoiding the pressure of having to act.

The Type Nine Emotional Passion: Laziness
Laziness is the passion of Type Nine. The words sloth, laziness, psycho-

spiritual inertia, acedia, indolence, and ignorance (in the Buddhist sense) all
communicate the same thing: a tendency to fall asleep to yourself. Laziness
refers to the tendency we all have to go unconscious to our inner
experience, to operate in automatic, pre-programmed ways because we
don’t consciously attend to all of the feelings, beliefs, and experiences that
might drive our behavior if we were aware of them. For Nines,
“psychological inertia” manifests as a deadening of feeling, an inability to
know what they want, an incapacity to contact themselves, and a hesitance
to voice strong opinions or assert their will in the world.
In The Enneagram of Passions and Virtues, Sandra Maitri defines the Type Nine
passion of “laziness” as an “inattention to self,” a “self-neglect,” a muffling
or tamping down of a Nine’s inner life.6 Nines may not seem “lazy” at all in
the usual way we think of the term (i.e., a reluctance to do things), though
they might; they are primarily lazy about paying attention to themselves.
The earliest word used to define the Nine’s passion (within the fourthcentury Christian Contemplative tradition) was “acedia.” Derived from the
Greek word a-chedia (no-care), acedia refers to “a laziness of the psyche and

of the spirit, rather than a tendency to inaction.”7 In psychological terms,
Naranjo explains that acedia “manifests as a loss of interiority, a refusal to
see, and a resistance to change.”8 Most importantly, Nines become lazy
about attending to their own internal life in a way they don’t see, such that
they lose a sense of their own being but don’t know it.
Naranjo further defines the “psychological inertia” of the Nine
personality by characterizing the Nine as someone who lacks fire and
passion, someone who suffers from a loss of inwardness and imagination.
The passion of psychological laziness also entails a deadening of feelings,
which may be apparent, as when someone doesn’t communicate much
about herself, or hidden, as when the Nine overcompensates by actively
conveying a genial or jovial disposition.
The passion of psychological laziness causes Nines to go deaf to their
inner voices, which causes an “eclipse” of the inner witness.9 Under the
sway of this passion, Nines unconsciously forget themselves, losing contact
with their emotions, their instincts, and their ability to detect and act on
their natural animal impulses. Thus, laziness brings with it a sense of “not
wanting to see, not wanting to be in touch with one’s experience.”10 This
directly impacts Nines’ ability to become aware of their internal patterns—
and since we all need to become aware of our internal patterns in order to
build the muscle of self-awareness, Nines may stay locked in their “acorn
shell” until they finally learn to make contact with their desire to break it
open.

The Type Nine Cognitive Mistake:
“Going Along to Get Along Is the Only Way to Go”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions; this continues even after the mental models that create
our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore. While the passion shapes
the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation” or
“cognitive mistake” preoccupies the personality’s thought processes.

In Nines, the mental fixation (called “Indolence” by Ichazo) that supports
the passion of sloth refers to a habit of not actively thinking about or caring
to think about your own priorities. Sloth governs Nines’ habit of falling
asleep to their inner experience. Indolence leads Nines to ignore and neglect
themselves. Then they create all manner of guiding thoughts, beliefs, and
core ideas related to living out their passion for forgetting themselves.
Psychologist Jerome Wagner contends that because Nines feel neglected
early on and lack a sense of belonging, they organize themselves around
patterns of thinking connected to an assumption that they aren’t important
and don’t have much to offer.11 Nines end up neglecting themselves and not
listening to their own inner voice as a result of a deep belief in their own
unimportance.
According to Wagner, to support the passion of psychological laziness,
Nines hold the following core beliefs as organizing psychological
principles.12

I don’t matter. It’s easier that way.
What I think and feel isn’t that important. And that’s okay.
Other people just feel more strongly about things than I do.
It’s not okay to be angry or upset because that puts you at odds
with others.
It’s more important to be nice or peaceful than to be true to
myself.

It’s not good to show anger because conflict destroys positive
connections with others.
If I’m not present and accessible to others, I’m safe.
I don’t know what I want, and it’s not that important anyway.
I’m incapable of knowing what I want.
Knowing what I want and asserting my desires in the world of
others takes too much work and will alienate people I need or
want to stay connected to.
It’s easier to go along with what other people want than go to
the trouble of asserting what I want.
Nines believe that it’s always best to avoid open conflict, and so in many
situations will think, “Why rock the boat?” They can’t see any reason to
disrupt things on their account. Given these key beliefs, it seems natural for
them to take the path of least resistance and give others what they want so
they can stay comfortable and undisturbed.

The Type Nine Trap:
“Staying Comfortable Eventually Creates Discomfort” or “Putting
Yourself in a Coma Seems Like a Good Way to Avoid Conflict”
As it does for each type, the cognitive fixation or “mental trance” of Type
Nine leads the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the
limitations of the personality cannot resolve.
Despite Nines’ unconscious need to preserve a sense of comfort and calm
at all costs, the truth is that avoiding conflict and an awareness of their own
desires leads to the creation of the discomfort and disharmony Nines are
trying to avoid. The pursuit of comfort inevitably produces discomfort
because it requires willfully ignoring some basic truths, like the
constructive and unifying potential of conflict and the necessity of
expressing your real feelings in order to establish deep connections.
For Nines, the desire to maintain harmony necessitates a deadening of
their own consciousness, inner aliveness, and passion, which limits the
quality of their engagement with life. And overadapting to others eventually
creates a sense of dissatisfaction that can leak out through passive-

aggressive behavior and lead to the kind of conflict the adaptation was
designed to prevent in the first place.

The Key Type Nine Traits
Over-Adjustment and Merging

The prominent Type Nine habit of adapting themselves to others’ agendas
represents an “over-adjustment” because Nines typically don’t just meet
others halfway, they lose the ability to access what their positions are and
give in to others completely—often without anyone knowing they’ve done
it. While Nines often help others to find compromises, they can tend to
proactively erase their own wants and needs to avoid experiencing a
scenario of conflicting needs altogether.
Type Nine individuals’ tendency to yield excessively to others entails a
postponing of the satisfaction of their own desires. This self-denial goes
along with the strategy of over-adjustment. As Naranjo explains, “excessive
adaptation to the world would be too painful to endure without selfforgetfulness.”13
Nines “merge” with others, but what does this mean? Merging happens
when Nines “take in” the positions, feelings, and desires of another person
to the point that they feel like they’re their own. They lose the boundaries
between themselves and other people. This is especially easy for Nines
because they usually don’t know what they want and can have a hard time
telling the difference between their own agenda and someone else’s.
Unconsciously, Nines feel motivated to retain the symbiotic bonds of
early childhood, so for them disconnection can feel catastrophic. Nines
orient themselves in relation to other people, so losing connections can
make them feel lost and adrift. Because of this—often without even being
conscious of why they are doing it—Nines do everything they can to
maintain a connection with important others, even to the point of going to
sleep to their own inner truth.
Resignation

At the heart of the Nine’s coping strategy of “going along to get along” is
their tendency to resign themselves to not getting what they want. In line
with this, they (often unconsciously) give up on the effort to even know
what they want.

Nines give up on themselves out of a deep belief that it doesn’t pay to
assert yourself. As Naranjo says, “it is as if the individual endorsed a
strategy of playing dead to stay alive (yet becoming tragically dead-in-life
in the name of life).”14 Their core belief that it’s not worth it to stand up for
what they want leads to a resignation that undergirds many other Nine traits
involving laziness with regard to their own desires. Giving up on what they
want makes it much easier to go along with what other people want.
Easygoing Nature/Affability

Although the downside of giving up your desires to go along with the
agendas of others is that you become more and more disconnected from
yourself, the upside is that people tend to find you likable, pleasant, and
easy to be around. And most Nines do fit this description: they don’t make
many demands on others, they are emotionally steady, and they can be solid
sources of support and friendship. Their habit of avoiding conflict and
tension motivates them to be easygoing and affable.
Of course, Nines’ reputation for being congenial, friendly, and generous
comes at a price—namely, a stronger connection to their own anger and
opinions. And despite their amiable disposition Nines can be hard to deal
with at times, especially when they’ve been so easygoing that they find
themselves doing things they don’t want to be doing and so become
stubborn or irritable. Overall, though, Nines tend to be laid-back, fun-loving
individuals.
Indecision

Nines often struggle with procrastination and indecision. Like Homer’s
Lotus-Eaters, Nines tend to be disconnected from their internal guidance
system, so they can experience extreme difficulty when they need to access
their desires to make a decision. While they may have preferences in daily
life, it may be hard for them to choose one life path over another, one career
over another, or one action over another.
Sometimes, however, Nines can more easily locate their preferences in
the negative: while they may not know what they want, they may know
what they don’t want. When this is the case, as the flip side of the tendency
to overadapt to others’ wishes, they may silently go against what others
want.

The Type Nine Shadow
Nines have blind spots related to their passion of laziness and their central
strategy of going to sleep to their own depths in order to get along more
easily with others. What they really want, their feelings, their opinions, and
their sense of their own inner truth can all be Shadow aspects for Nines,
who unconsciously avoid finding out what they want as a way of
maintaining a sense of comfort, safety, and connectedness with others. It
can be hard for Nines to take a firm position, express a preference, or feel
strong emotions, because they habitually “forget” themselves to more easily
flow with others. When asked what they want, many Nines say they simply
don’t know.
Nines don’t want to experience their anger, so their aggression represents
a big blind spot. They also don’t want to own anything—strong opinions,
desires, and emotions—that might somehow pit them against the important
people in their lives, so these may all reside in their Shadow. Nines believe
that any kind of tension can lead to separation, so they tend to deny
anything inside themselves that might cause an energetic disruption in their
personal connections. Much of their inner life, therefore, can be something
of a blind spot. Along with this, they can be blind to instances where there
is a legitimate need for conflict or an honest discussion.
The presence of anger in the Nine Shadow heightens the possibility that
it will leak out in passive-aggressive forms, such as stubbornness, passive
resistance, procrastination, and irritability—and they may not see how this
happens or how it impacts others. Like the other body-based types, Nines
don’t like being told what to do; while they will usually say yes to others as
a way of avoiding the conflict that might arise if they overtly refuse a
request, they can often say yes when they mean no. In this way—by
passively resisting what others want them to do—they hold on to a sense of
independence and avoid being controlled by the desires of others even
while seeming to be adaptive and flexible. They may also be unaware of
this whole dynamic.
Nines focus on maintaining a sense of peace and comfort, so the need for
change can also be part of their Shadow. This can include avoiding realities
like needing to get a job or change careers or leave a relationship—anything
that might inspire the need to act or the need for change, as Nines can get
stuck in the inertia of wanting to maintain the status quo.

Because Nines dislike attracting attention and can be compulsively
unselfish, their positive achievements or desire for recognition may also
represent blind spots. Nines usually do not want to get attention, even for
the good things they do, so they tend to share the credit with others to avoid
the discomfort of drawing the focus to themselves.
The Shadow of the Type Nine Passion:
Sloth in Dante’s Underworld
From the perspective of the Enneagram, the shadow of the Type
Nine personality has a fitting punishment and an appropriate
placement in Dante’s underworld. In the symbolic world of The
Inferno, the Passion of Sloth is “sinful” in that it represents a
laziness that causes the individual to waste life day after day,
resisting natural energy and initiative. In the Type Nine
personality, Sloth can engender a deep, barely perceptible
simmering resentment or passive resistance that most often isn’t
expressed at all. Accordingly, the Pilgrim finds these Slothful
shades punished alongside the Wrathful in the muddy river Styx.
But while the actively angry “Wrathful” spirits “constantly tear
and mangle each other,” the Slothful can be detected under the
muddy surface only by the bubbles that indicate their presence:15
beneath the slimy top are sighing souls who make these
waters bubble at the surface; your eyes will tell you this—
just look around.
Bogged in this slime they say, ‘Sluggish we were in the sweet
air made happy by the sun, and the smoke of sloth was
smoldering in our hearts; now we lie sluggish here in this
black muck!’ This is the hymn they gurgle in their throats but
cannot sing in words that truly sound.
Like their more visibly angry neighbors, the Slothful are
embedded in the muddy mire of their Passion symbolized by the
“slimy waters” of the swamplike river Styx. But unlike the
“Wrathful” Type Ones, Nines’ anger is much deeper and more
buried, so the Slothful are depicted in Dante’s underworld as
“sighing souls” who are, like their anger in life, submerged
beneath the surface.

The Three Kinds of Nines:
The Type Nine Subtypes
THE PASSION OF TYPE NINE IS LAZINESS (or sloth), defined as a psychological

resistance to actively living from your deeper self or your own sense of
“being”—an aversion to being aware of your own inner feelings,
sensations, and desires.
The three Type Nine subtype personalities all express this passion of
psycho-spiritual laziness, but they act it out in three distinct ways
depending on which of the three main instinctual drives—self-preservation,
social relationship, or sexual bonding—dominates. The passion of laziness
thus gets expressed through Nines’ strong unconscious need to merge with
something or someone else as a way of distracting themselves from their
own sense of being—or from the pain of not being connected to their own
sense of being.
In this way, all three Type Nine subtypes express a need for fusion, but
they fuse or merge with different things as a way of finding the comfort and
connectedness they lack within themselves or with others. The SelfPreservation Nine fuses with physical comforts and activities, the Social
Nine fuses with groups, and the Sexual Nine fuses with other individuals.
Focusing somewhere else, however, allows Nines to continue to avoid
connecting more deeply with their own inner sense of being. The three
Nines all share a passion for self-deadening, which takes the form of
laziness or inactivity or incapacity with regard to their own feelings, needs,
and wants.

The Self-Preservation Nine: “Appetite”
The combination of the passion of laziness and the dominant instinct for
self-preservation in Nines results in a personality subtype that Naranjo,
following Ichazo, calls “Appetite.” The deeper motivation of this subtype of
Type Nine is finding a sense of comfort in the world through the
satisfaction of physical needs. This personality finds satisfaction in
activities such as eating, reading, playing games, watching television,
sleeping, or even working (if work is a comfortable thing to do).
Whichever form of activity is chosen by a given Self-Preservation Nine,
the key is that this Nine expresses his or her need to find protection and

well-being by merging with an experience of the satisfaction of concrete
needs. In giving their attention over to a favored activity in this way, these
Nines simultaneously avoid or “forget” their own being—or the pain of not
being connected to their own being—and find a substitute sense of “being”
in the comfort of the fulfillment of routine, everyday appetites.
For Self-Preservation Nines, it feels safer to take refuge in physical
comfort, or in a routine that structures their experience in concrete and
familiar ways, than to have to show up in the world and risk potential
conflict or overstimulation. It’s easier to erase yourself by losing yourself in
comfortable activities than to reveal yourself or open yourself up to
whatever unpredictable or complex thing might be happening in the outside
world.
The name “Appetite” doesn’t refer just to eating, but also to the need to
find a sense of well-being through the fulfillment of various physical needs
—for food, for comfort, for restfulness, or for something interesting to pay
attention to that provides a sense of support or structure or peace. Appetite
also refers to concreteness, to the grounding aspect of fulfilling physical
and material needs in simple, straightforward, tangible, and enjoyable ways.
One Self-Preservation Nine I know focuses her self-care efforts on physical
fitness and dieting in specific, routine ways. She belongs to a gym where
she exercises with a close-knit community of people who all participate in
regular early-morning workouts and support each other by going on
periodic diets together based on the clearly articulated structure of a
practical nutritional methodology.
Self-Preservation Nines are concrete people, oriented to immediate
experience, who don’t relate much to abstractions or metaphysical concepts.
With these Nines there is less “psychological mindedness” and
introspection and more focus on tangible and immediate “things to do.”
They find experience much easier to deal with than theory. They don’t
always put their experience into words, however—they don’t talk a lot
about what is going on inside them in general.
Naranjo describes the meaning behind “Appetite” as a kind of excessive
“creature-likeness,” characterized by an “I eat therefore I am” or an “I sleep
therefore I am” attitude that erases the question of “being” in a larger sense.
For these Nines, the ordinary facts of life get in the way of thinking about
abstract things, like what might be lacking in their experience. These are
people who live life in a more simple, direct way.

More than the other two Type Nine subtypes, these Nines tend to want
more time alone. Like the other Nines, Self-Preservation Nines habitually
focus their attention on other people and on their environment, but SelfPreservation Nines can actually find it more relaxing and grounding to be
by themselves, as it allows them to more fully relax into whatever activity
they are engaged with. These individuals also tend to have a distinctive
sense of humor characterized by a wry and self-deprecating attitude.
Nines are very loving people, but deep down they usually don’t have the
sense of being loved—it’s as if they have resigned themselves to not
actively receiving love for themselves. For the Self-Preservation Nine, the
search for comfort in pleasurable activities may reflect a desire for
compensation for their deeper sense of abnegation, or a giving up of the
need for love, with the fulfillment of other appetites. The jolliness or funloving spirit of this type of Nine, though it is a very real, very endearing
characteristic of this personality, may be another kind of compensation for
an early lack—they substitute fun for love.
Self-Preservation Nines tend to be active and intuitive, and they express a
kind of subtle strength. This is the most “Eight-ish” of the three Nine
subtypes. Their sense of inertia with regard to taking action places them
firmly in the Nine type, so they are unlikely to be mistaken for Eights, but
they do have forceful energy, especially in contrast to the Sexual Nine,
which is a much less assertive character. Self-Preservation Nines have a
stronger presence than the other two Nine subtype personalities, and they
can be more irritable and stubborn. It can be very difficult for them to
accept that another person is right. This subtype also lives a life of excess
more than the other Nines, and while they don’t get angry very often, they
can express the “fury of a peacemaker” when they get mad at people who
cause problems.
Daniel, a Self-Preservation Nine, speaks:
Growing up in the Midwest, people often said that I was “a good
eater.” I think they meant it as a compliment. But it was true that
eating was always a source of pleasure for me. It has also been
something that I’ve indulged in when under a lot of stress. I
managed a political campaign when I was in my early twenties
and gained twenty-five pounds in a few short months. Today I

recognize my relationship to food is a compensation for a lack of
feeling loved, and I’m learning how to give that love to myself
rather than just eating.
I love sleep, but sometimes it’s more of an escape than a
physiological need. A Nine friend of mine was telling me about an
argument he got into. He said he was so mad he needed to go take
a nap. I could totally relate. Routines are comforting, too. For
many years I followed the same routine whenever I’d turn on my
computer: first check e-mail, then go to a series of five different
websites, all in the same order each time, multiple times per day.
Often, I’d have many more important things to do, but I needed
the comfort fix provided by visiting familiar websites before I
could begin working.
Being alone feels relaxing because merging into eating or
sleeping or watching TV doesn’t take much effort. But I’ve
learned that just staying comfortable doesn’t help me with the
important task of regaining autonomy and a sense of myself. For
that I need to settle in to the harmony of my own being, which
takes a lot of work because I have unresolved internal conflicts
and my own position isn’t immediately clear to me.
Some people have asked me if I might actually be a Type Eight
because I seem more embodied than other Nines and I have
learned over time to be more assertive. I take that as a
compliment! I’ve intentionally used my Eight wing to support my
personal development by practicing expressing myself,
experiencing my anger, and taking action.

The Social Nine: “Participation” (Countertype)
Social Nines express the passion of psychological laziness (or sloth)
through merging with the group, working hard in support of group interests,
and prioritizing the group’s needs above their own. Social Nines are
congenial characters with a need to feel like they’re a part of things—a need
that expresses an underlying feeling of being different or not fitting in with
the group or community. This person is a light-hearted, sociable, fun-loving
character who expresses a driving need to be involved in the group.

The Social Nine’s need to participate comes from their deeper feeling of
not belonging to the group. This feeling drives the Social Nine to
overcompensate by being generous and sacrificing whatever is necessary to
meet the needs of the group as a way of earning membership. They have an
intense need to feel that they are a part of things, because they don’t feel
that they are. They feel like they have to do something extra in order to be
included in a group, so they work twice as hard to support the group to
make sure they belong.
Social Nines have a passion for doing what is necessary to pay the ticket
for group admission, for being one with that group—but it takes a lot of
effort. Social Nines can be workaholics; they feel a need to work hard and
give a lot. But it’s not just work—they energetically demonstrate
friendliness and sociability; they don’t show their pain; they don’t burden
others; and they don’t show people how much energy it takes to devote so
much effort to the community. These are people who are generous and
unselfish, mindful of the group, and gifted in meeting the needs of others to
the point where they sacrifice themselves to satisfy the responsibility others
want to put on them.
In contrast to the other two Nine Subtypes, who tend to be more subdued
characters, Social Nines are very outgoing and energetic—this is what
makes this the counter-type Nine. Social Nines have a special brand of
strength because they feel motivated to fight for the needs of the group.
Social Nines are extroverted, expressive, and forceful, and so they go
against the inertia typical of Type Nine in some ways—but on the inside
they still have a sense of laziness about their own needs and wants.
Social Nines make very good leaders—the best kind of leaders, in fact—
in the sense that they are good, unselfish people who strive to satisfy the
responsibility given them. They can be especially gifted mediators; they
naturally want to translate differing opinions so that everyone is heard and
conflict in the group is avoided. They put a lot of energy into their work as
a leader. They have an ability to bear a lot, sometimes to the extent that they
become a “human punching bag.” These Nines give of themselves
unconditionally as a response to a deeper (sometimes unconscious) fear of
abandonment, conflict, separation, and the potential loss of peace and
harmony.
Social Nines like to control things, and they like to talk a lot. Because
they work so hard for the group, they may have no time left for themselves.

They tend to have very full lives—full of everything but themselves.16 And
while Social Nines get their identity and their sense of reality from
belonging, they often doubt their own existence, their own sense of self.
The outward expression of this subtype is more happy than sad, but theirs
may ultimately be a kind of partial participation: underneath their cheerful
exterior, their sense of not belonging persists and creates a kind of sadness
that isn’t communicated to others. They don’t feel their suffering very much
—but they don’t feel extreme, euphoric highs, either. They are more in the
middle emotionally—neither hot nor cold—and they may be somewhat
detached from their emotions and sensations.
Social Nines can look like Type Threes because they work very hard and
accomplish a lot without showing the stress of it. But they differ from
Threes in that they are much more reluctant to be in the spotlight and they
don’t support the group to create an image or to win admiration from others.
They may also be mistaken for Twos because they are active in meeting the
needs of others, but they have much less need for approval and appreciation
than Twos, and are generally more emotionally steady.
Maya, a Social Nine, speaks:
I was raised as part of a group. Growing up in a large family with
five siblings, I often found myself mediating between family
members in order to reduce conflict and to promote tolerance,
understanding, and consensus. Around controversial dinner table
topics, for example, when the conversation got heated, I was often
in the middle—translating, explaining, and trying to get each side
to see the other’s point of view. As a result, I did well leading
groups. In high school, for example, I was president of several
different societies and clubs. In my early career, I often succeeded
in setting up groups that promoted teamwork and cohesiveness,
including a volleyball team. Today, I still screen the environment,
especially new ones, to know how to best fit in and orient myself
quietly to the needs of the whole. When making a decision that
will affect an entire group, I like to hear all the different opinions,
synthesize them, and then consolidate them in my mind before
making a decision. My feelers are always out, reading the milieu
around me.

The Sexual Nine: “Fusion”
Sexual Nines unconsciously express a need to be through another—to gain
a sense of “being” they don’t find inside themselves through fusion with
somebody else. They unconsciously use relationships to feed their sense of
being because it can feel too challenging or threatening to be on their own;
they substitute another person’s agenda for their own because it feels more
comfortable to stand or be through another. These Nines may not even
realize they have made this substitution, however; it often happens at a
subconscious level.
Sexual Nines are not connected to their own passion for living (in the
good sense of the term “passion”), and so they try to locate it by blending
with another person. When they are in close relationships, they may have
the sense that there are no boundaries between their experience and that of
important others. The merging with the other takes the form of an energetic
taking on of feelings, attitudes, beliefs, and even behavior. These Nines feel
a sense of loneliness or abandonment that seems like it can only be filled by
another person, whether or not they realize it consciously.
The problem inherent in this stance, of course, is that true union—a real
relationship between two people—requires that both people stand on their
own feet before coming to meet each other. But Sexual Nines may
experience difficulty in standing on their own two feet, being grounded in
themselves, and living out their own sense of purpose, so they look for it in
another person.
Individuals with this subtype can merge with a partner, a parent, a close
friend, or any important person as a way of finding a life purpose and
avoiding their own experience of the lack of such purpose. They have a
sense of uncertainty about their own identity and a lack of structure in their
lives, and they look to other people to satisfy their sense of who they are
and what they want without realizing that this is happening.
Sexual Nines tend to be very kind, gentle, tender, and sweet. They are the
least assertive of the Nines. However, the tenderness they express, like
other gestures of caring that come from the personality rather than the real
self, can be, to one extent or another, false. More than the other two Nine
subtypes, these Nines can have a difficult time locating their own
motivation to act in support of their own initiatives. They can even know

they want to do something and not be able to do it for a long time,
especially if it involves any kind of conflict with others.
Sexual Nines defend against the pain of early separation (and separations
in general) by unconsciously denying the existence of boundaries. This is
an attempt to avoid being aware of their own deeper sense of isolation,
aloneness, and individuality.17 This Nine may have the sense that “I am
when with the other.” In maintaining the important connections in their
lives, they may be so focused on meeting the needs of others that they
betray their own needs. When this occurs, they may engage in passiveaggressive forms of rebellion, such as avoiding someone or ignoring
something important in a way that affects the relationship.
Sexual Nines can resemble Type Fours, as they may feel a sense of
melancholy and experience and express similar themes and feelings related
to relationships. Having their center of gravity in others means they have a
special sensitivity to the wishes and moods of the important people in their
lives and an acute awareness of the push-pull connection and disconnection
dynamics in a relationship. However, while Fours are self-referencing,
Sexual Nines are primarily other-referencing, and they may take on the
feelings of another as opposed to having more immediate awareness of their
own emotional ups and downs, as Fours do.
Sexual Nines may also share central concerns with Type Twos in that
they can lack a solid sense of self and then look to their important
relationships as a way to find self-definition or a sense of identity. Twos
differ from these Nines, however, in that they focus more attention on
constructing an image. Twos also usually enjoy being the center of
attention, while this is much less comfortable for Sexual Nines.
Cynthia, a Sexual Nine, speaks:
My experience of the Passion of Sloth has felt less like laziness
and more like an incapacity: a sense of being unable to go inside
and connect with a deeper aspect of myself. In fact, I always had
a fear of connecting with my deeper sense of self, or, more
accurately, a fear of discovering that there was actually nothing
there. My sense of security comes from a feeling of being
connected to a special other—first and longest, to my mother, who
had no problem telling me who I was or who I should be, what I

should think or feel, and who didn’t leave much space for me to
come to that on my own. It wasn’t that she was domineering—it
was more that I was so exquisitely attuned to her that the merest
flicker of disapproval might threaten the connection I felt to her.
If I ever lost my connection to my mother I felt anxiety related to a
sense of not knowing what I wanted or needed. In retrospect, I
can recognize that my anxiety reflected a fear that she would
abandon me if I wanted or did something she disapproved of.
Connection to her, and the protection that merger with her
offered, ensured that I wouldn’t experience the terrible feeling of
being out of harmony. The feelings I had if I was ever not
connected to her—anger, rage, or the pain of rejection caused by
disobedience—were so awful that I don’t remember even allowing
myself to be aware of them past the age of three or four.
As I grew older, I learned that I could substitute the connection to
my mother with the connection to a best friend or partner. If I
were in the company of someone who was willing to make
decisions, take the lead, or tell me what to do or how to be, I
could relax and go along. I was always anxious about disrupting
that connection, and I was typically agreeable and easygoing in
order to ensure it, to such an extent that I often couldn’t locate my
own opinion at all if it differed from that of my special other. I’ve
always said that if you need someone to run your errands with
you, I’m your girl. In adolescence, I developed a strong feeling of
self-rejection: I didn’t feel that I really had a personality and
envied those who did. Of course, once I was certain of the merger
with my special other, I could also find my sense of rebellion:
being told who or how to be would sometimes rub me wrong and I
could react in a passive-aggressive way that was out of character
with my usually sweet nature. In its worst form this looked like
cheating on romantic partners or acting out in ways that were so
split off I didn’t even recognize myself.
Fortunately, my life circumstances have been such that I was
unable to completely lose myself in a merger with a partner. In
reaction to a disastrously controlling early relationship, I
unconsciously chose men who were so emotionally distant that

they didn’t take over my soul, even though I thought I wanted
them to. This has forced me to develop a strong sense of self and a
clear sense of purpose, whereas I think if I’d had a partner I
would have remained lost and aimless, still wanting to be
directed.
Over the years, I have learned how to be with myself in deeper
and deeper ways, and in midlife I actually enjoy being on my
own, treasure my meditation practice, and have a wonderful
community. I occasionally still long for another to tell me what to
do, but typically only regarding small decisions. My sense of who
I am, both positive and negative, is clearer than it’s ever been,
and I trust that my personality indeed exists and is even visible to
others. My early experiences have resulted in a finely honed
intuition and the ability to empathize with and attune to others
quite deeply; to see from multiple perspectives at once, but also to
locate my own feelings and opinions and trust that my
relationships can withstand differences of opinion. I am aware,
however, that even though I have made great strides in
independence and my capacity to be alone, there are many things
I haven’t attempted in life (i.e., travel abroad or buying a home)
without a special other by my side to lend me courage.

“The Work” for Type Nine:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS NINES WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of creating discomfort and disharmony by
erasing themselves in an attempt to create peace and harmony. By creating a
stronger connection to their own inner world, asserting their needs and
wants, and acting more powerfully on their own behalf, they can avoid their
tendency to overadjust to others to the point of forgetting themselves
completely.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Nines, this process involves observing the way they go to
sleep to their own depths in order to get along with others; exploring the

ways they seek to stay comfortable and avoid their own feelings and
desires; and making active efforts to connect with themselves as much as
they endeavor to stay connected to others. It is particularly important for
them to learn to access their desires, manifest their own power, and act on
their own behalf.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Nines can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really see—with
fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Nines take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Forgetting yourself to more easily go along with the wishes and wills of others

Observe what happens when you or someone else asks you what you want.
If you don’t know, note what it’s like not to know and how you feel when
you look for a preference and can’t find one. Tune in to what’s going on
when you do have a priority and you distract yourself with less important
matters. Look out for ways you engage in passive-aggressive behavior and
note any clues to what you might be angry or upset about. Observe any
activities you engage in that help you go to sleep to yourself.
Avoiding and diffusing conflict as a way of staying comfortable and denying separation

Observe all the ways in which you seek to diffuse tension, mediate conflict,
and avoid disharmony. What kinds of things to you do? How do you feel
when conflict threatens? Observe what kinds of things make you feel
uncomfortable and watch what you do to try to stay comfortable.
Getting stuck in inertia with regard to your own priorities

Observe what happens when you need to act on something and you don’t.
How are you distracting yourself? What are you avoiding? Note what

happens inside you when you have a decision to make. What do you get out
of staying on the fence and not deciding? Note what happens when change
happens or might happen, and any reactions you have.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Nines observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Nines can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider, to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns:
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Nines cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how they
operate as coping strategies, Nines have the opportunity to become more
aware of how and why they go to sleep to themselves as a way to avoid
uncomfortable or painful experiences. If Nines can tell the story of their
early life and look for ways that tuning out their inner experience helped
them in specific ways—perhaps to avoid particular feelings or experiences
related to separation or not being heard and valued—they can have more
compassion for themselves and recognize how their coping strategies
operate. These insights into why Nines fell asleep in the first place and how
this works as a protection can help them see how these defenses have
ensured their psychological survival, but also how they’ve kept them
trapped in their “acorn-self” by cutting them off from the aliveness and
creativity of their true (oak tree) Self.
What painful emotions are the Type Nine patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic
anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. Nines adopt a strategy that allows them to dissociate from
painful emotions so that they don’t exist anymore. Difficult feelings related
to not being supported and recognized, or not feeling connected or included,
can conveniently be forgotten. This potentially false sense of comfort
comes at a high price, however: the disconnection from your internal life. If
Nines can work to discover what feelings they habitually avoid as part of
their pattern of overadjusting to others and under-attending to themselves,
they can make more conscious decisions about whether they want to remain
asleep or wake up to more of who they really are.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Nine patterns operate in me now?

Through reflecting on how these patterns operate, the three kinds of Nines
can begin to have a greater awareness of how their defensive patterns
happen in everyday life—and in the present moment. If they can
consciously catch themselves in the act of distracting themselves from
themselves, or neglecting their internal world of desires and emotions, they
can wake up to the deeper motivations that drive them to forget themselves
in order to flow with others. It can be eye-opening for Nines to see how
they actively don’t make an effort to get what they want. They may not
realize that, as William James famously said, “when you have a choice to
make and you don’t make it, that is in itself a choice.” By understanding
when they give up and why, how they have difficulty knowing what they
want and why, and how they fail to stand up for themselves and why, they
can create the basis for the motivation necessary to reverse these patterns if
they choose to.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Nines keep themselves from seeing?

To really increase their self-knowledge, it will be important for Nines to
remind themselves about what they don’t see when their personality
programming is driving the show. Nines can be compulsively unselfish, so
they habitually don’t pay attention to their own needs, wants, and priorities
—their own agendas. If your own desires aren’t on your radar screen, it
makes it hard to take care of yourself and get what you want. If you have a

blind spot where your anger, passion, and power would normally be, how
can you stand up for yourself or make your mark in the world? If you go to
sleep to your anger, what happens to it? You may be acting out your anger
in passive-aggressive or active-explosive ways that undermine you. In the
process of neglecting themselves, Nines fail to own their positive qualities
and their ability to impact others more powerfully in positive ways.
Focusing on looking for what you don’t see may help you get out of the
habit of taking yourself for granted and putting others way ahead of
yourself.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The irony of the Nine strategy is that by trying to stay connected to others
by blending with their agendas, they neuter their relationships. By not being
more known to yourself, you can’t make yourself more known to the people
who like and love you. By not knowing and saying what you want, you
might not get what you want from the people you are connected to, which
limits the quality of those connections and leaves you feeling empty and
dissatisfied. By not recognizing your naturally occurring anger, you may be
acting it out through passive forms of resistance that don’t serve you and
infuriate others. By not valuing yourself enough to do the work of building
a stronger connection to your inner world, you also invite others devalue
you.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to think, feel, and act with more choice and
awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Nines about “what to
do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns of your core type
described above in the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the
Enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to

study your passion (or “Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite:
the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Nine Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Forgetting yourself to more easily go along with the wishes and
wills of others
Practice “remembering yourself.” One of the first things Gurdjieff tells us all to do

when we embark on a course of conscious self-work is to try to “remember
ourselves” all the time. This means tuning into yourself, feeling yourself,
and being conscious of yourself in the moment. We all need to learn to
remember ourselves; but for Nines, who are the prototype personality of the
way we fall asleep to ourselves, it is especially important to pay close
attention to what you are thinking, feeling, and doing in an ongoing,
mindful way. Self-remembering is the antidote for self-forgetting.
Ask yourself what you want (and ask others to ask you too). Make it a practice to ask

yourself what you want on a regular basis. At first, it may be discouraging,
because you probably won’t know some (or much) of the time. But if you
continue to ask yourself what you want with the intention of finding out, at
some point you will start getting regular answers. I once worked with a
couple, one partner of which was a Type Nine. At one point he told his
partner that it really helped him when she asked him what he wanted.
Encouraging others to ask you what you want energetically invites you to
assume that you do know what you want (and you want others to recognize
you have preferences), even if you need some time to get in touch with your
“internal compass.”
Fake it until you make it. If you don’t know what you want, try making things up.

When I’m working with psychotherapy clients who have a hard time
accessing their inner knowledge, I ask them to take a guess or make
something up. And guess what? They often make an excellent “guess” that
helps them tap into their inner truth. So start believing that, somewhere
inside, you know what you want, and just take a stab at it. Over time you

will develop a clearer channel to that part of you that does know what you
want and need.

Avoiding and diffusing conflict as a way of staying comfortable and
denying separation
Reframe conflict as a good thing that brings you closer to people. Lean on your Eight wing

and recognize that fighting with people can be a good way to get to know
each other, learn to trust one another, and resolve differences in a way that
strengthens connections. Learn to enjoy expressing what you think.
Work to get in touch with your anger and be more direct. Maintaining a sense of comfort

by avoiding your emotions involves denying or neglecting an important part
of who you are. Your anger is connected to your power and your passion for
living. Remind yourself that experiencing your anger doesn’t mean you
have to express it—but if you can tap into it more, you can work on being
more direct about what you want and how you feel, which will improve
your relationships, not damage them. People appreciate directness. And
when you go along to get along and later realize you didn’t want to go
along at all, surfacing your disagreement at that point can cause more
problems than it would have if you were direct at the beginning.
Take baby steps toward conflict by practicing giving and receiving feedback. My Nine friend,

Matt, says that for Nines, feedback is conflict. So practice giving feedback
to people you trust—and let yourself start with something really small and
work up from there. Work on owning your power and reminding yourself
that you have the strength and the steadiness to handle whatever comes—
and that conflict (or feedback) does not automatically lead to separation.

Getting stuck in inertia with regard to your own priorities
Remind yourself that staying comfortable leads to discomfort. Maintaining a sense of

comfort often involves denying practical realities that will eventually cause
major discomfort. Be positive and proactive and coach yourself through
change by thinking through to the likely end of what will happen if you stay
on the fence and resist the natural flow of evolution in your life. Ask for
support from others in brainstorming about what you might want to do as a

way of unearthing and examining the possibilities—without letting them
tell you what to do. Challenge your avoidance by gently reminding yourself
that not choosing is actually a choice, and by thinking about the likely
consequences of inaction as well as action. Allow yourself to imagine or
fantasize about positive outcomes. Remind yourself that you can have what
you want, but you have to act (however slowly) to make it happen.

The Inner Flow for Type Nine:
Using the Arrow Lines to Chart Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
define one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “growth(through)-stress,” or “stress-growth” point, and its “child-heart-(security)”
point, or “child-heart” point, map one kind of growth path described by the
symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can be seen to suggest one kind of
growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow is the path of
development. The “stress-growth” point ahead represents
specific challenges the nature of our core point personality
places in front of us.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child-heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we have unconsciously repressed, occasionally return
to in times of stress or security, and which must be
reintroduced consciously in support of moving forward along
the arrow lines.

Type Nine Moving Forward to Type Six: Consciously Using the Six
“Growth–Stress” Point for Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Nines brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Six: allowing for a clearer perception
of fears, anxieties, thoughts, and feelings about what might go wrong as a
way to motivate action and mobilize the inner resources of faith and
courage. Not surprisingly, Nines can find the anxiety and sense of threat
they might feel as they move to Six to be uncomfortable. But these feelings
(experienced consciously and managed mindfully) can help move Nines out
of inertia and stimulate them to action in support of themselves. This shift
may involve a greater sense of urgency about tapping into real desires, as
well as genuine capacities for taking action to handle problems and deal
with threats to their well-being. As inaction and staying comfortable can, in
the extreme, represent real threats to Nines’ safety and well-being, moving
to Six can help Nines find reasons to act on their own behalf.
The Nine working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools healthy Type Sixes themselves use: analytical skills and proactive
activity in support of self-protection. The Six stance has a basis in intuiting
and tuning in to threats to the self and maintaining an alertness to security
concerns, which can serve to balance out Nines’ focus on staying
comfortable and distracting themselves with inessentials. The mental
activity of vigilance and critical analysis natural to the Six helps Nines to go
into their heads to more purposefully analyze what is going on in their lives
and how they may be forgetting themselves in ways that undermine their

security. The intuitive ability of Sixes also helps Nines develop more active
ways to access what is going on inside them.

Type Nine Moving Back to Type Three:
Consciously Using the “Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early
Issues and Find Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Nines calls for them to reclaim their ability to
actively “do” to further their own goals. Nines’ early impulses to
accomplish things and set their own course of action may not have been
seen and supported in childhood, which likely motivated the adoption of a
survival strategy oriented to going along with others rather than staying
focused on their goals and ambitions. Nines may have felt that as children
they had to decide between their own needs and wants and those of
important others, and so going along with others and muting their own
goals may have been something they did to cope.
When there isn’t very much awareness around the move to Three, it can
occur as an anxious and confused sense of “doing” in response to extreme
situations of not having done enough. Navigated consciously, however, a
Nine can use “the move to Three” developmentally to reestablish a healthy
balance between supporting and attuning to others and doing what it takes
to further their own achievements. Nines can focus on the qualities of this
“child–security” point to understand what they may have needed to go to
sleep to in themselves in the past to get along in the world. “Moving back to
Three” can thus be a way of re-engaging with their lost sense of initiative
and self-interested action. For this reason, it can be both a move toward a
sense of security and a way to embrace and reintegrate something that had
to be avoided early on, such that Nines can free themselves up to move
forward on their growth path toward the Six Point.
By reincorporating Type Three qualities, Nines can consciously remind
themselves that it’s okay to want some attention for themselves and that it’s
important to value themselves and their accomplishments. Instead of quietly
avoiding things and resisting others’ demands by disappearing, Nines can
seek to embody the high side of Three and spark themselves to act in
positive ways to reach specific goals by thinking more about how they
appear to others. In this way, Nines can use their Three child-security point
as a way of reclaiming their inner doer, and balance out their talent for
deeply understanding the perspectives of others with a deeper

understanding of their own desire for productivity and effectiveness for
their own sake.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Sloth/Laziness and Aiming for Right Action
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
Nine, the Vice (or passion) of the type is laziness (or sloth), and its
opposite, the Virtue, is right action. The theory of growth communicated by
this “Vice to Virtue conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how
our passion functions and can consciously work toward the embodiment of
our higher Virtue, the more we can free ourselves from the unconscious
habits and fixated patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side
or “oak tree–Self.”
As Nines become more familiar with their experience of laziness and
develop the ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work
further by making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to
the passion of laziness. In the case of Type Nine, the Virtue of right action
represents a state of being that Nines can attain through consciously
manifesting their higher capacities.
Right action is a way of being that is awake and engaged and fully
present to our natural impulses to know and move toward what we want and
need. This higher Virtue encompasses both the ability to actively wake up
by witnessing our inner life in an ongoing way and a purposeful focus on
our most important desires and priorities. Right action means you can
continually remember yourself instead of habitually forgetting yourself, and
that you can wake yourself up and get yourself moving when you have
fallen asleep. It also means you can more regularly access your own center
of gravity and act powerfully and decisively in the world.
Embodying right action as a Nine means you have examined and worked
on being more aware of your unconscious tendency to fall asleep to your
own depths to the point where you can regularly catch yourself in the act of
tuning yourself out and merging with something outside yourself.
Achieving right action means you have easy access to your gut, which
allows you to come from the seat of your own power and act in conscious
ways in the world. We all naturally go up and down along a vertical

dimension of this Vice to Virtue continuum—we rise to higher levels of
functioning as we work on ourselves, but because it’s difficult to stay
awake, we also slip back in times of stress. If you are a Nine, consciously
aiming to embody right action opens you up to a greater awareness of your
self, such that your own natural impulses can spur you to act on your own
behalf and in service of a higher good based on your own unique
experience. By focusing on right action, Nines can strengthen their
conscious ability to manifest their desires in the world as an active
contribution to their own happiness and that of others.
When Nines can do the “Vice to Virtue” work of noticing how they tune
out the inner voices calling them home in the Homerian sense, they can
wake up to their own feelings, instincts, and desires and model for all of us
how to strengthen the inner observer in a way that leads us to a more
conscious participation in the life of our community.

Specific Work for the Three Type Nine Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
The path from observing your passion to finding its antidote is not exactly
the same for each of the subtypes. The path of conscious self-work has been
characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and grace:”18 the “grit” of our
personality habits, the “grind” of our efforts to grow, and the “grace” that
comes to us when we strive to be more aware of ourselves, to develop
ourselves, and work toward our virtues in positive and healthy ways.
According to Naranjo, each subtype has to grind, or exert effort, against
something slightly different. This insight is one of the great benefits of
understanding the three distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.
can travel the path from laziness to right action by
making conscious contact with their anger more often and being more
proactive in thinking through, tapping into, and acting from their own selfinterest. Feeling and working with your anger instead of avoiding it can
help you connect more thoroughly with your passion and your power; and if
you have more awareness of your anger you can connect to an inner sense
of strength and fortitude that will help you work to get what you want
instead of giving up on it and losing yourself. If you can go for what you
want in more direct ways, you can fulfill your deeper desires and bolster
your inner sense of being instead of distracting yourself from its absence.
Self-Preservation Nines

Being more directly in touch with your power and passion also allows you
to open up more to being loved and having the kind of connections that
nurture you instead of the pseudo-connections you normally satisfy yourself
with because your “acorn-self” thinks they’re all you can get. Instead of the
empty calories of your comfortable activities and your enmeshed
relationships, allow yourself to feed your appetite for love and presence by
accessing your emotions, taking in real love, and making more conscious
connections.
Social Nines can travel the path from laziness to right action by getting in

touch with any sadness that underlies their upbeat, congenial demeanor and
identifying the ways in which their hard work for groups might distract
them from their own personal evolution. If you are a Social Nine it will be
important for you to slow down and take the risk of sharing more of
yourself with others, especially your deeper needs, wants, and feelings.
Right action means knowing what’s going on in your depths and not being
afraid to surface any sadness, anger, or discomfort so that you can allow
yourself to be moved by your own personal motives instead of your desire
to support others. Stop hiding what is going on inside you as a way of
staying comfortable and work to further your own interests as much as you
work to further the needs of your family or community. Notice any fear of
abandonment, conflict, or loss of peace you may feel, and allow yourself to
be with those feelings as a way of loving and supporting yourself. Own the
ways in which you are part of the group and take in how much people value
your hard work and support as a way of actively addressing your deeper
needs for belonging.
Sexual Nines can travel the path from laziness to right action by recognizing
and acting on their deeper need for separation: making time to be alone
more and not always finding a sense of “being” through others. Recognize
the ways you may have inadvertently erased yourself to maintain specific
relationships and take action to create healthy boundaries with those you are
closest to. Notice when you are not “in” yourself. Act to find your own
sense of purpose and your own experience of being, and notice how
blending with others actually prevents authentic relationships. Fusion
mimics real connection, but is in the end only a substitute or a mirage,
because it means that you have given yourself up and overadapted to other
people. Engage in right action by doing the work it takes to get in touch

with your own needs, desires, experiences, and emotions—and, most of all,
your own sense of purpose. Make a point of noting ways in which you
might differ from important others, and take the risk to voice these
differences as a way of affirming who you are as a separate individual.
Build relationships from the starting point of your own preferences and
aspirations as a way to establish more regular contact with your “true self”
and you will create more satisfying relationships in which you can fully be
who you are and still feel loved and accepted.

Conclusion
THE NINE POINT REPRESENTS the way we fall asleep to ourselves in order to
cope with a world that seems to require us to erase our own sense of being
in order to peacefully coexist with others. The Nine path of growth shows
us how to transform our inner laziness and the universal tendency to fall
asleep to our present experience into the energy and sense of purpose
required to wake up to who we are and who we can be. In each of the Type
Nine subtypes, we see a specific character who teaches us what is possible
when we turn psycho-spiritual inertia into a fully awake ability to further
our own evolution through the alchemy of self-observation, selfdevelopment, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 4

The Point Eight Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
True friends stab you in the front.
—Oscar Wilde

TYPE EIGHT REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who denies weakness
and vulnerability by taking refuge in fearlessness, power, and strength. This
archetype tends to express instinctual drives in a less inhibited way and to
push back on whatever might restrict them. A personality with this
archetype focuses on asserting control in big ways through an “expansive
solution” characterized by domination and intensity. This approach entails
identification with a glorified self (rather than a diminished sense of self).1
The shades of this archetype exist in similar form in Freud’s concepts of
the “id” and with his and Jung’s ideas about “libido.” These concepts seek
to describe the energetic force behind the central human instinctual drives—
the forceful energy or momentum that moves us to get our animal needs
met undeterred. The Type Eight archetype represents a “desire or impulse
which is unchecked by any kind of authority.” It is “libido [psychic energy]
in its natural state” and “the instinctual ground from which our
consciousness springs.”2
Freud saw the id as the part of our psyche that represents “the repository
of the instinctual drives, sexual and aggressive.”3 The id operates on the
pleasure principle, “demanding satisfaction of drives without delay.”4 The
Eight archetype thus conveys the intense drive energy within the dynamic
system of the human psyche. The id is the basis of sexual energy in
particular, but it is also the desire or charge or energy that motivates all
action to get instinctual needs met.
Naranjo points out, however, that while the Eight archetype “would seem
a more instinctive manner of being, as in the Freudian conception of an id-

centered character,” this assumption is not exactly the case, because the
Eight personality is “an ego that sides with instinct” rather than the
expression of instinct itself.5 “More than id-driven,” Naranjo explains, this
personality stands against the super-ego; it opposes the part of the psyche
that represents the “inner censor” and enforces “the standards and
prohibitions of our parents and society.”6
Pure natural freedom and spontaneity in instinctual movement is a
characteristic of the higher Self, but instead the Eight personality expresses
an “acorn self” lookalike: an automatic ego reaction opposing any
limitations on their instinctual drives. This auto-rebellion against the rules
of society or established authority (like those expressed by the Type One
archetype) is not free and spontaneous. Naranjo clarifies that this
archetype’s basis in “counter-repression” and always siding with and
defending desires can, in a paradoxical way, make Type Eight rigidly
intolerant of constraints. In this way, an excess of libidinal/instinctual drive
energy leads Type Eight to excessively crave and drive toward sensate
experience. Just as Type One represents the “anti-instinctual” force within
the human personality, Type Eight represents the “pro-instinctual” force
inside all of us.
In addition to this human drive, the Eight archetype also represents an
aspect of the masculine principle, or the animus. Just as the Type Two
archetype embodies a version of “the inner feminine” principle, the Type
Eight archetype communicates the archetypal idea of “the masculine” in
women and in men. Naranjo points out that we can see elements of this
masculine archetype in Western culture’s focus on rationality and taking
action, its devaluation of softer emotions, and our prevalent ways of
becoming desensitized to violence.7
Type Eights are thus the prototype for that tendency in all of us to feel the
need to “get big” and take the most direct route to getting what we need by
pushing back on internal and external forces that seek to restrain our
instinctual impulses. As Enneagram scholar Sandra Maitri puts it, the Eight
archetype represents our identification “with the body and with its drives
and biological imperatives.”8 Just as the Three archetype represents the way
we all take on a personality and the Four archetype highlights the universal
presence of the Shadow, the Eight archetype channels the energetic
momentum of our animal drives to fulfill our need to thrive and multiply.

The Type Eight personality is lusty, intense, energetic, and powerful. This
“under-social” stance motivates rebellion against the restrictive authority of
established authorities, rules and conventions. The Type Eight habit of mind
motivates them to go up against external power and limitations both as a
way of asserting their control and as a way of combating oppression and
protecting the weak. This archetype is strong in people who believe in
“taking justice into their own hands, rather than delegating to institutions.”9
The Eight archetype also represents the ways in which we all deny our
weakness or smallness and imagine ourselves as powerful enough to do
whatever we need to do for ourselves or for others. We all share a tendency
to ignore inner and outer constraints when satisfying our needs or defending
ourselves becomes urgent enough.
In the Enneagram framework, people with the Type Eight personality are
strong, powerful, and fearless. They tend to be very concerned with justice
and protective of the oppressed and the needy and can be fair, just, and
authoritative. Eights are usually refreshingly direct in their communication
and intolerant of “bullshit.” They value the truth, and they can confront
others and engage in constructive conflict when necessary. Having natural
leadership ability, they tend to be honest, straightforward, and effective
when it comes to getting things done and making things happen. Eights tend
to be fun, generous, and intense, and this combination can make them great
friends and exciting companions. They are good “big-picture” thinkers,
hard workers, and passionate advocates for the people and causes they care
about. They enjoy making order out of chaos and can bring a great deal of
energy to bear in accomplishing important tasks in the world, but they may
not observe appropriate limits and boundaries. In fact, the Eight
“superpower” is superpower.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Eights’ gifts and
strengths also reflect their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel.” Their strength
and power often represents overcompensation for not wanting to feel weak
or own their vulnerable feelings. Accordingly, Eights may judge themselves
or others for having softer feelings or expressing any kind of vulnerability.
And because they deny their vulnerability—and don’t realize that true
strength comes from being able to be vulnerable—they can overdo their
forcefulness. Eights often fail to see the negative effects they create by
expressing too much power without a balanced recognition of normal
human weaknesses. They can be intense and fun-loving, but they may also

be overbearing, impatient, and intolerant of frustration. However, when they
can balance their personal power and strength with a more conscious
awareness of their own weaknesses, vulnerabilities, and impact, they can be
courageous (and even heroic) leaders, partners, and friends.
The Type Eight Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey: The Cyclops
Type Eight characteristics, like autonomy, fearlessness, force,
anger, and self-indulgence, could hardly find a more powerful
embodiment than the Cyclops. The Cyclops occupy the second
land that Odysseus and his comrades visit on their journey home
from the Trojan War. The “high and mighty” Cyclops are “lawless
brutes” without council or meeting hall. Each of them is “a law
unto himself…not a care in the world for any neighbor.”10 The
Cyclops “want what they want when they want it, and they take
it. They don’t suffer shame or guilt or reservations. They’re not
worried about what others think.”11
The island these giant creatures inhabit is a land of natural
abundance. It yields bumper crops and beautiful flocks of all
kinds without tending, as if suffused with powerful natural
energy. The Cyclops enjoy this abundance to the fullest—and
guard it jealously.
Odysseus and his landing party encounter the Cyclops
Polyphemus in his enormous and well-stocked lair. They ask for
the mercy Zeus guarantees for any suppliant guest, but the
Cyclops lets them know that his kind fears neither gods nor men:
You must be a fool, stranger, or come from nowhere, telling
me to fear the gods or avoid their wrath! We Cyclops never
blink at Zeus and Zeus’s shield of storm and thunder, or any
other blessed god—we’ve got more force by far. I’d never
spare you in fear of Zeus’s hatred, you or your comrades
here, unless I had the urge.12
To prove his point, Polyphemus begins eating Odysseus’s
crewmen one by one.
But Polyphemus knows only his power, not his vulnerability. His
appetite and his natural limitations prove to be his undoing.

Odysseus gives Polyphemus bowl after bowl of exquisite—and
powerful—wine until he falls into a drunken sleep. The Greeks
then blind the monster with a fire-hardened spike and escape the
lair hidden beneath his lush, wooly sheep. For all his power, the
Cyclops can only vent blind anger, casting boulders at the sea in
his rage.
The Type Eight character represents the archetype of a lusty,
going-for-what-you-want energy—a realization of personal power
that supports an antisocial stance capable of breaking rules and
rebelling against authority. This same personal power is also
naturally self-indulgent and excessive. The Cyclops episode in
The Odyssey shows how unrestrained appetite and anger can lead
to a power—and a downfall—that is larger than life.

The Type Eight Personality Structure
EIGHTS BELONG TO THE BODY-BASED TRIAD, which is associated with the core
emotion of anger and themes of power and control. These three types at the
top of the Enneagram also habitually “forget themselves,” especially with
regard to their needs and vulnerabilities. Each of the three personalities in
this triad, located around the core point of Type Nine, is shaped—at a basic
level—by its relationship to anger and control. Nines underplay anger,
exerting power passively through a quiet resistance to being controlled.
Ones are in conflict with their anger: they think it’s bad to be angry, so they
repress it until it expresses as resentment. Ones exert control through
adherence to rules, structure, and doing thing the “right” way. Eights,
meanwhile, have easy access to angry energy, and they often overdo their
anger. They often move impulsively to express their anger before giving
themselves time to think. Regarding control, Eights deny their vulnerability
and overcompensate by exerting power in direct ways to control what’s
happening.

Eights naturally focus their attention on power and control: who has it
and who doesn’t, and how it’s wielded. Other people usually perceive them
as having a “big energy” and possessing a great deal of personal power and
strength. It often surprises Eights when they get the feedback that others
experience them as intimidating, as they usually don’t intend to be scary.
But their very presence communicates power and strength, so others often
project a threatening sense onto them.
Eights also naturally have a lot of energy, and they tend to think in terms
of the big picture or larger vision. Type Eight individuals like to move
things forward in straightforward ways. They dislike having to pay attention
to details or consider what other people want them to do. They are most
comfortable when they are in control. They believe that the world is divided
into “the strong” and “the weak,” and given that choice, they identify with
“the strong.”

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Eight
Many Eights report having grown up in combative or conflict-heavy
environments in which they had to grow up fast to survive. Most were
unable to maintain a sense of childlike innocence because they were either
deprived or not sufficiently protected as children—often in the face of some
sort of violence or neglect. In many cases, the Eight was the youngest,
smallest child in a big family. From the perspective of the Eight child,
survival depended on denying the fact of being small. Taking on a persona
that was bigger and more powerful helped them to deal with a world that
did not provide needed love, care, or protection.

Type Eight individuals were thus typically forced to become forceful
early on—to leave childhood behind prematurely and become tough in
order to protect themselves and sometimes others. To get their needs met,
many Eights had to take matters into their own hands and exert control over
their environment at an early age. As Naranjo notes, “it is my impression
that violence in the home [of an Eight] is more frequent than in the life
histories of other characters, and in such cases it is easy to understand the
development of insensitivity, toughening up, and cynicism.”13
In circumstances like these, the Eight child develops a coping strategy
based on being strong and taking control in whatever way it is possible to
do so. The Eight coping strategy thus centers on the child’s need to
defensively deny their vulnerability and develop a belief in their
invulnerability. As adults, Eights attempt to compensate for their
helplessness in the face of the perceived injustices of their childhood by
taking justice into their own hands and expressing power in the name of
justice.14
The Eight personality’s approach leads to an ability to automatically
become “big” when they are presented with challenges, according to the
idea that “the best defense is a good offense.” This “bigness” leads to a
personality style characterized by a large and impactful energetic presence
(Eights often seem larger than they physically are), a big appetite for
everything (food, drink, pleasure, sex), and excessive behavior (eating and
drinking too much, staying out too late, working too hard).
Because Eights have an early need to feel powerful and so learn to deny
their vulnerability, they often feel they can make their own rules and ignore
limitations that others place on them. They tend to see reality in their own
terms, unconsciously bending their perception of facts and confusing
objective reality with their own personal sense of what’s true. This stance
goes along with having a strong will and a tendency to view themselves as
the most powerful person around—they make the automatic assumption
that the way they see things is the only way things can be seen.
With a coping style that relies on getting big and powerful to come up
against people or difficult conditions, Eights can sometimes be perceived by
others as bossy or controlling, though they often just consider themselves
direct and honest. Through the development of their specific survival
strategy, Eights become skilled at getting what they need and want and also
at fighting injustice and protecting those they feel need their support. They

pursue their aims through force, intimidation, or aggression. More so than
other personalities, Eights are willing to confront or fight with others if they
need to.
Eights’ strategy of reducing awareness of their own vulnerability allows
them to feel very powerful and even invincible. As “self-forgetting” types,
they tend to minimize their own physical needs and natural human
limitations. Doing so supports their stance of being able to take on a lot—to
work very hard and bear the burden of many responsibilities—even when
this is detrimental to their health and well-being.
As Naranjo points out, however, “the reverse side of the necessity for
mastery is [the Eight’s] dread of anything connoting helplessness; this is the
most poignant dread he has.”15 This personality draws on power and the
will to dominate others as key components in their “offense as defense”
approach to life. There is also, as psychologist Karen Horney suggests, an
intense need for “vindictive triumph,” especially when they feel they’ve
been wronged by someone. Ichazo called this personality “Ego-Venge” to
reflect the feelings of vengefulness an Eight can feel as a result of the early
need to be able to fight back. Naranjo cites a potent combination of
“powerful impulses and insufficient checks” as the force behind the Eight’s
need for vengeance—but certainly also a lack of contact with inner
weakness (and perhaps the vague memory of it) also plays a role.
Amelia, a Type Eight, describes her childhood situation and the
development of her coping strategy:
My parents were powerful and charismatic. My father (a Type
Seven) considered all “societal rules” irrelevant. He did
whatever he wanted and considered himself God. My mother (a
Type Four) was drawn to high society living, yet very bitter about
my father’s sometimes atrocious behaviour. This resulted in many
years of very cruel verbal altercations between my parents at
home, but never in public.
As they were always traveling, my older brother and I were
frequently left with the nanny. My brother was considered the
“heir” by my parents and our nanny worshiped him. Although
she definitely took care of my very basic needs, I was considered
“extra” work and was removed from the house so she could

spend more time with my brother. For an example, as a baby, I
was placed in a pram and pushed to the end of the garden and left
for many hours—and often forgotten. When we were very young
children, my brother became a bully and I became his punching
bag. I used to do all his chores around the house rather than be
painfully beaten, and I was called his “secret servant” by the
adults. So from very early on, this situation in which my parents
were either absent or constantly fighting and a brother who was
favored and allowed to behave badly led me to believe that life
was unfair and that I needed to be strong if I was going to
survive. My vulnerability and innocence were not attended to or
nurtured but on some level I must have understood this as when
sent to boarding school at seven years old, I immediately started
protecting and looking after those younger and more vulnerable
than I.
Even now, as I remember this, I can feel it physically in my body:
my jaw is clenching at the thought of the injustice of it and I am
infused energetically with a kind of battle armour. It’s as if even
now, in this moment, I am reacting to the unfairness. I can also
observe how I am writing my story in such a direct way. There is
little space—then or even now—for my heart to be open to
innocence and vulnerability, as I still want to protect the truth of
the sweet, tender, and very sensitive child that I was—and in some
ways still am. However today, I have a deeper and more
appreciative understanding of why that little girl inside of me
chose what she considered necessary at that very young age—to
be tough and strong!

The Main Type Eight Defense Mechanism: Denial
The main psychological defense mechanism used by Eights is denial,
especially when it comes to the need to appear strong and hide
vulnerability. In order to give themselves a feeling that they can take on any
challenge, Eights habitually deny any vulnerabilities they might have. After
all, it can be difficult or even impossible to be strong and win the fight if
you are preoccupied with your weak points or vulnerabilities. If you can
totally deny that you have any weaknesses, you can experience yourself as
invulnerable—and having confidence that you can’t be hurt is a good

feeling to have in trying to win a battle, dominate a situation, or survive
difficult circumstances.
Psychologist Nancy McWilliams defines denial by explaining that one
way young children handle unpleasant experiences is “to refuse to accept
that they are happening.”16 In this way, inconvenient or painful truths can
simply be denied and made false. Denial can be understood by anyone who
has experienced a catastrophe of some kind, like the death of a loved one.
The first reaction a person usually has upon hearing this kind of extreme
bad news is “it can’t have happened” or “it didn’t happen.”
Another common defense mechanism associated with Type Eight is
omnipotent control. Omnipotent control occurs early on in a child’s life when a
child “makes things happen” by evoking her mother’s responsiveness.
When the child is hungry, she cries, and the mother brings her food. When
she is scared, the mother comes to protect her. At this early point, the
child’s merger with the mother gives her the sense that she controls the
world. Later in life, we can sometimes imagine that things can be made to
be the way we want them to be through a combination of denial and
confident self-assertion. Thus, Eights sometimes believe they can change
the way things are simply by exerting control over them, defensively
imagining that they can direct the course of events in whatever way they
wish without being subject to the limitations imposed by reality.

The Type Eight Focus of Attention
The coping strategy of denying vulnerability and getting big and strong to
deal with conflict and meet needs leads to a focus on power, control, and
injustice. Most Eights are adept at coming into a new situation and
assessing very quickly who has the power and who doesn’t.
Perceiving these differences in power makes Eights highly attuned to
situations in which people are being unjustly persecuted or those they care
about are in need of protection. (This is especially true of Social Eights,
which will be discussed further below.) Eights have a focus on protecting,
in part, as a projection of their own denied vulnerability onto someone they
feel protective and supportive toward. In this way, they can feel moved to
action in response to their own unconscious needs for care without
experiencing the pain of feeling vulnerable.
Eights want and need a lot of stimulation, so they can also pay a lot of
attention to meeting their needs for pleasure and other forms of satisfaction.

They can be intolerant of frustration, so they scan their environment for
sources of fulfillment: interesting people, fun things to do, good things to
eat and drink, and challenging situations to master. The passion of Type
Eight is lust, which implies a strong drive for satisfaction of physical needs.
This drive focuses Eights’ attention on the fulfillment of their appetites.
Eights like to impose their authority and overcome resistance to their
influence and strength. They are naturally drawn to people and situations
that could well involve confrontation in order to right injustices, protect
others, flush out bad actors, or wrest power from unjust authorities.
Finally, Eights tend to see the world in terms of a grand vision or a broad
perspective of what is possible. Their big view of things matches their big
energy and their larger-than-life sense of their own power and authority.
Eights easily see the big picture and naturally want to create order out of
disorder. They generally feel confident about both their vision of the way
things are and their ability to make important things happen.

The Type Eight Emotional Passion: Lust
The passion of the Type Eight is lust. Naranjo defines lust as “a passion for
excess, a passion that seeks intensity, not only through sex, but in all
manner of stimulation: activity, anxiety, spices, high speed, the pleasure of
loud music, and so on.”17 While lust is often associated mostly with sex, as
Naranjo indicates, an Eight’s lust is not limited to the realm of sex; rather, it
suggests a hunger for many kinds of sensual stimulation and physical
fulfillments. Eights have what is at times an insatiable desire for the
satisfaction of their desires—and an unapologetic attitude toward the quest
for pleasure.
The emotional passion of each Enneagram type constitutes a central
focus or drive, and for Eights this often looks like a no-holds-barred
approach to life and an intense pursuit of all kinds of pleasures: physical
contact, good food, the breaking of taboos, material comforts, and the fruits
of hard work. Sometimes this passion for excess attracts them to
opportunities in which they can exert their strength and feel their power.
Lust leads Eights to look for challenges to overcome and pleasures to enjoy.
And lust can often cause Eights to overdo the things they do—to go to
extremes. As Naranjo explains, “Instead of being inhibited, instead of
standing in the way of their desires…they side with their desires, they

defend them.”18 Instead of repressing their impulses, they purposefully
become an enemy of the inner repressor.
As Naranjo points out, the passion of lust, and the traits that signal it—
like intensity, contactfulness, and a love of physical indulgences—are
“intimately bound” to the core of the Type Eight personality structure and
the sensory-motor physicality that undergirds lust. People who have both a
primary connection to the body as the basis of their personality, and a
central life strategy based on expressing and feeling their physical power,
also naturally prioritize the lustful search for physical and sensual
fulfillment. As Maitri explains, “perhaps the most complete way of
understanding the meaning of lust as it is used in the map of the Enneagram
is as an orientation excessively tipped toward the physical.”19
Eights’ lustful predisposition thus contributes to character traits such as
“hedonism, the propensity to boredom when not sufficiently stimulated, the
craving for excitement, impatience, and impulsiveness.”20 Lust drives
Eights toward hedonism almost as the prize in the fight for the right to
pleasure and satisfaction or the reward for many struggles of will and
power. Thus, lust should be seen less as simply an overriding need for
(especially physical) pleasures, and more as a passion for intensity and the
right to be excessive.

The Type Eight Cognitive Mistake:
“I’m as Strong and Invincible as I Think I Am” or “It’s True
Because I Said It”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and these patterns continue even after the mental
models that create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore.21 While
the passion shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive
fixation” or mental “trance” preoccupies the personality’s thought
processes.
The core issue for Eights is control. The passion of lust and the mental
outlook that supports it grow out of an early experience of being hurt by
authorities who misused their power. In this situation, Eights’ adaptive
response is to overcompensate by becoming more powerful than everyone
else as a way of assuring they will never be dominated again—and this

means needing to have thoughts and assumptions that support their belief in
their own strength and abilities.

The core beliefs and mental patterns of thinking associated with the Eight
mental stance (or “trance”)—their need to see themselves as strong and in
charge (and not weak)—often involve thoughts that reinforce their selfconfidence and invincibility. This same fixation intellectually minimizes the
importance of vulnerability and tenderness. Of course Eights want and need
affection like everyone else, but they are willing to hold beliefs that
reinforce their toughness and power and devalue or work against an
acknowledgment of their need for the support of others.
Because their mindset is based on control, justice, and avoiding
weakness, Eights may hold some or all of the following key beliefs and
mental organizing principles:

In a tough world, you need to be strong to survive.
It’s bad to be weak or vulnerable. Weak people are not worthy
of respect.
I am stronger and more powerful than other people.
I can do whatever I want.
No one can tell me what to do.
Other people do not have the power to limit me in what I want
and what I do.

I’m not subject to the constraints others might want to put on
me.
I have the power to make things happen and do what I want.
If some is good, more is better.
Sometimes you need to break the rules—or make your own
rules—to do what needs to be done.
I work hard and play hard.
It’s not bad to be bad.
Powerful people tend to take advantage of weaker individuals.
I protect the people I care about.
While I don’t necessarily “like” conflict, I can confront others
when I need to move forward, get what I want, protect
someone, or combat an injustice.
These common Eight beliefs and recurring thoughts support a personality
with a powerful, confident, and authoritative self-presentation. Eights
develop their sense of their own authority and their independence from
external authorities. When they adhere strongly to this mental stance—
when they are “in the trance” of their type—it may be much harder for them
to observe themselves, see a larger view of things, and “come home” to the
deeper, more tender feelings that point the way to their true self.

The Type Eight Trap:
“Avoiding Vulnerability Leaves You Vulnerable”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Eight
leads the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the
limitations of the personality cannot resolve.
The basic internal conflict for Eights is that while they are fundamentally
motivated to deny their vulnerability and exercise control in the world, they
may end up creating situations in which they make themselves more
vulnerable by not taking their natural human limitations into account. Thus,
if they neglect their own physical needs by working too hard and playing
too much, they can become physically ill. If they strive to exercise power
and control over specific situations, they may end up not being in control

through a failure to see the value of diplomacy. Eights’ neglect or denial of
their own vulnerabilities does not prevent those vulnerabilities from having
an influence. If we do not have some consciousness about our own weak
points, they tend to impact situations as a direct result of being left
unattended.
In the (usually unconscious) quest to avoid feeling helpless at all costs,
Eights may go overboard, invoking hostility or misunderstandings by
bringing too much power to bear. When Eights deny their own sensitivity,
they are more likely to be insensitive to others, which invites others to react
insensitively and creates a cycle of aggression.
So, while Eights seek to exert influence in the world through the exercise
of their strength and determination, they can end up hurting their cause by
overdoing it and inadvertently marshalling forces against themselves. A
lack of empathy with the softer emotional side of life wards off deeper
connections with others. The Eights’ power can result in a negative cycle in
which they cannot obtain the nurturing love they really need.

The Key Type Eight Traits
Anger and the Willingness to Confront

Of the three “anger types” at the top of the Enneagram, Eights, in contrast
to Nines and Ones, usually have less resistance to confronting people,
identifying their anger, and expressing aggressive feelings. Except for
possibly the Sexual Four and the Sexual Six, Eights have more access to
anger than any other type. They often describe anger as an experience of a
strong energy. They are also among the types who are least intimidated by
other people’s anger. Eights can sometimes be stereotyped as “liking”
conflict. However, most Eights will say that they don’t necessarily “like”
conflict, but can and will engage in it if necessary.
Paradoxically, because Eights can do anger and conflict, this willingness
often means they don’t have to. Eights are body types with a strong
connection to their physical power center. They convey an aura of solidity
and strength, which can often mean they don’t have to get angry—they can
hold their ground, get their way, or make themselves understood without
having to express aggression. Eights’ relative ease with communicating
anger can make them seem fearless, which is true in the sense they are not
primarily motivated by fear and habitually denying vulnerable feelings.

This fearlessness makes Eights seem powerful and strong—even when they
aren’t saying anything at all.
When Eights do confront people, it is often in an effort (conscious or
unconscious) to discover their true motives. Through conflict, Eights learn
what others are made of, what their true intentions are, and how they will
wield their power. Again contrary to common stereotypes, Eights don’t
necessarily “like” anger or conflicts, but they can move more easily into
this space than other types and may even use conflict as a way to get closer
to other people. Once an Eight has a conflict with you, depending on the
outcome, it might mean they’ll trust you more. And some Eights will say
they can enjoy a good fight.
When Eights do communicate anger, they usually get over it quickly. The
energy of anger is gone as soon at it’s expressed, as if it’s been discharged.
Especially in contrast to other types, like Twos or Ones or Nines, after
Eights express anger, they usually don’t feel regretful or guilty. It simply
happened, and now it’s over.
Rebelliousness

In describing some of the main characteristics of Type Eight, Naranjo
explains that “lust itself implies an element of rebellion in its assertive
opposition to the inhibition of pleasure, rebellion stands out as a trait on its
own, more prominent in ennea-type VIII than in any other character.”22
The prototype of the revolutionary activist, Type Eights rebel in the sense
that they don’t easily acknowledge an authority above themselves. Their
natural stance against the rules and conventions set down by authorities
inevitably has a flavor of rebellion. As Naranjo explains: “It is in virtue of
such blunt invalidation of authority that ‘badness’ automatically becomes
the way to be.”23 And while Eights may get perceived as “bad” to the extent
that they don’t follow the rules and aren’t afraid to go up against the
conventional (hierarchical) way of doing things, Eights may or may not see
themselves as openly or severely rebellious. They may simply take the
position that they are not going to submit to the authority that others might
want to have over them. Rather, they see themselves as their own authority
and make or break rules as they see fit.
In psychological terms, as Naranjo points out, a generalized attitude of
“rebellion against authority can usually be traced back to a rebellion in the
face of the father,”24 who is the archetypal carrier of authority in the family.

Many Type Eight individuals have histories in which they learned not to
expect anything good from their fathers, so they “implicitly come to regard
parental power as illegitimate.”25 When you view the power of the most
obvious authority as illegitimate, it is an easy step to assert your own
authority as the highest or only authority.
Punitiveness/Revenge

Naranjo cites Ichazo as saying that Eights focus on revenge26, but he
clarifies this by explaining that Eights are not vindictive in an overt way. He
states that an Eight individual more commonly “retaliates angrily at the
moment and gets quickly over his irritation” and may experience a desire to
“get even” as an immediate reaction.27 In addition to this, Naranjo asserts
that vengefulness in the Eight character is more of a deep-seated, long-term
trait that motivates them to “take justice into their own hands” in response
to the pain or impotence they may have felt as children.
When Eights get hurt by others they may not allow themselves to fully
register the pain of that hurt; feeling pain might mean experiencing their
vulnerability, which Eights automatically avoid. So, instead of feeling hurt,
they may unconsciously act out their feelings by focusing on getting even
for being hurt. By putting their focus and energy toward somehow getting
revenge, Eights redirect their painful feelings into a show of strength or
power—feelings that they are much more comfortable experiencing.
The tendency to want to take revenge on others who have hurt them is
also connected to the Eight’s central concern with justice. Eights often want
to right wrongs committed by others, and their focus on justice and fairness
can inspire vengeful feelings toward those they perceive as hurting or
exploiting people they want to protect.
Dominance

Eights can dominate situations easily, whether they actively decide to or
not. Through their coping strategy of automatically becoming strong and
powerful, Eights typically hold a lot of power just by being there. Naturally
assertive and ready to show aggression when necessary, they can
energetically dominate others even without consciously meaning to.
While Eights like to be in control, they don’t always assert their ability to
control a situation that already has an acknowledged leader. If there is a
vacuum of leadership, however, they are ready (if not compelled) to fill the

void. Eights’ tendency to dominate represents a compensatory maneuver
designed to avoid finding themselves in a weak or undefended position. If
you are geared toward avoiding vulnerable feelings, being ready and able to
exert power and push back on someone who might inspire those feelings
works well as a strategy.
Interestingly, because Eights exude strength, sometimes people around
Eights will cede control to them, as many people are happy to have
someone else bear the responsibility of taking charge. Alternatively, others
may at times feel overpowered by Eights’ natural strength and resent them
for being pushy, bossy, or overbearing.
Insensitivity

Eights can be perceived as insensitive. This characteristic understandably
grows out of their tendency to minimize the presence of softer, more
vulnerable emotions like fear, hurt, and weakness. Eights unconsciously
distance themselves from these feelings, and, as a result, usually have a
default mode that represents a tougher, unsentimental stance. If you are an
Eight, being ready to go on the offense and push back at someone who
threatens you means you have to lessen contact with vulnerable feelings.
This can lead to a defensive emotional posture that others can describe as
“insensitive,” “callous,” “intimidating,” or “ruthless.”
Autonomy

Eights value their independence and autonomy. Even more prominently, as
Naranjo points out, Eights idealize their autonomy. Not wanting to be seen
as weak or to find themselves in a vulnerable position, Eights disavow their
dependency on others. This renunciation can lead to an independent
presentation as well as an avoidance of emotions and experiences that could
make them feel their need for other people.
Putting yourself in a position to have to depend on other people sounds
like a terrible idea to someone who likes to be in control, doesn’t like to be
told what to do, and isn’t very susceptible to the vulnerabilities associated
with dependent relationships. Eights convey invincibility; passive
dependency is something that many Eights consider anathema.
Sensory-Motor Dominance

Naranjo calls Eights the most “sensory-motor” of personalities. This means
that Eights are firmly rooted in the physical, in the “here and now” sphere

of the senses, and in a kinesthetic, body-based way of functioning. Oriented
primarily toward the present, they concentrate on what is concrete and what
is stimulating right now.
The prominence of sensory-motor experience also means that Eights
engage in action more than thinking and feeling. Their primary movement
is to take action. In line with this tendency toward action and self-assertion,
Eights often don’t slow down long enough to ponder what they are doing
before they do it. Naranjo describes this as a “lusty clutching at the present
and an excited impatience toward memory, abstractions, anticipations, as
well as a desensitization to the subtlety of aesthetic and spiritual
experience.”28 What is most real and compelling to Eights is what
stimulates the physical senses in a tangible and immediate way.
Eights can tend to act without thinking things through, and, like the
Cyclops, can display an overreliance on taking action. Eights’ adherence to
the familiar pattern of bold and forceful action sometimes can lead them to
miscalculate and overreach in situations where a more nuanced approach
would be better.

The Type Eight Shadow
Each type’s Shadow reveals the blind spots of the character—what they
tend to remain asleep to as part of their survival strategy and resulting focus
of attention.
People with Type Eight personalities tend to ignore or minimize any data
revealing their own weaknesses and vulnerabilities. This coping strategy
works well early on in response to an environment in which they are
threatened by powerful people who hurt or neglect them; however, when
they reach adulthood, the shadow side of this defense can present many
problems. As humans, we all have vulnerabilities, but Eights learn to hide
theirs—even from themselves—to build a life based on being strong,
resilient, and invincible. As a result, Eights can be completely unaware of
some of their own weaknesses, vulnerabilities, sensitivities, and challenges.
Eights are naturally protective of beings they care about and feel
responsible for. When Eights call upon their own power in seeking to
protect those they perceive as having less power, they often project their
own vulnerability onto others. By perceiving vulnerability and weakness as
attributes that others have, as experiences that are distant from and external to
them, Eights can separate themselves from their own vulnerable feelings

and yet still act to address weakness. This pattern can reflect Eights’
genuine qualities of generosity and courage, but it can also be a way for
them to remain unconscious of their own vulnerable side.
While Eights are strong characters, they often don’t see or know the
impact of their strength; the actual nature of the influence they exert on
others may be a blind spot for them. They can intimidate others without
meaning to, and they can bring much more than the optimal force to bear on
situations. While Eights can be very direct and straightforward in a positive
way, they can sometimes be blunt to the point of being hurtful or insensitive
when they don’t see how much bite may be behind their directness.
Eights can work incredibly hard, but, because they go to sleep to their
own vulnerabilities and limitations, they can work themselves to the point
of exhaustion and may not know to stop until they become physically ill or
injured.
The energy of lust motivates Eights to indulge in fun and pleasurable
activities, often to excess, and because their natural human vulnerabilities
reside in their Shadow, they may be totally unaware of healthy limits. And
while some of this lusty pleasure-seeking can represent a wonderful zest for
living and capacity for enjoyment, Eights may party excessively without
seeing how their pursuit of pleasure may be overcompensation for an
avoidance of their pain or other vulnerable emotions. Not wanting to feel
weak or to be seen as weak, they may deny their natural vulnerable feelings
through an unconscious flight into excessive eating, drinking, or
socializing, which can create problems with their health and in their
relationships.
Eights may also have blind spots around how they interpret reality in
specific situations or in general. They tend to deny important aspects of
what might be true or real when those things don’t fit in with the way they
want to see things. This narrow perspective can be another aspect of
bringing too much power to bear—they can equate their own personal truth
with the objective truth and not see the difference.29 They can believe they
are right about everything, or that their opinions are correct interpretations
of what is happening, even if they aren’t necessarily seeing all of the data
completely or accurately. This impulse makes it hard for them to see when
they are wrong or mistaken and to apologize.
Eights can get bored if life is not stimulating enough and may push for
conflict, intensity, or excess in order to avoid whatever feelings might lie

behind their experience of “boredom.” When Eights complain about being
bored, it often reflects an unconscious avoidance of deeper feelings. Fun
and excitement provide an escape from feeling empty, anxious, confused,
sad, or powerless, all of which may be emotional blind spots for Eights. The
automatic search for intensity, stimulation, and fun keeps those difficult
emotional experiences out of their awareness. Eights’ passion is lust, and
this means they have big appetites—for fun, stimulating experiences, and
even work—but their impulsiveness and excessive indulgences can hide the
vulnerability, weakness, and darker emotions that they unconsciously deny
and relegate to their Shadow.
The Shadow of the Type Eight Passion:
Lust in Dante’s Underworld
The passion of lust, like gluttony, “makes reason slave to
appetite.”30 In the case of the Type Eight personality, this Shadow
passion is a wanton indulgence in many desires, but especially
sensual ones. Accordingly, the Inferno casts the Lustful as spirits
trapped helplessly in a shifting black wind they are powerless to
control:
The infernal storm, eternal in its rage, sweeps and drives the
spirits with its blast: it whirls them, lashing them with
punishment. When they are swept back past their place of
judgment, then come the shrieks, laments and anguished
cries; there they blaspheme God’s almighty power.31
The Lustful have plenty of excuses for giving in to their desire.
The Pilgrim is so moved by one seductive love story told by one
of the Lustful that he swoons. The Passion of Lust within the
Type Eight shadow is thus portrayed in Dante’s underworld as a
stubborn unwillingness for impulses to be restrained by any
boundaries on satisfaction. In addition, the Lustful in the
underworld are deep in denial and completely unrepentant.
Emblematic of the shadow side of the Type Eight personality, the
only regret the Lustful have is being punished at all.

The Three Kinds of Eights:
The Type Eight Subtypes
THE THREE SUBTYPES OF TYPE EIGHT express the passion of lust in three
distinct ways. Self-Preservation Eights directly and powerfully pursue the
things they need in order to survive. Social Eights have a need to protect
others and go up against those who commit injustices. Sexual Eights are
passionate and charismatic characters who go against social conventions in
a provocative way.
The Self-Preservation Eight stands out as the most defended, or the most
“armed,” of the Eights. Geared toward getting whatever is necessary to
meet their needs, Self-Preservation Eights use their power to find the
shortest path between their desires and the satisfaction of their desires. The
Social Eight is a mellower, less aggressive Eight, who uses power to protect
other people and promote social causes. The Sexual Eight is the most
rebellious Eight, using their power to go up against authority and attract
people through charismatic shows of intensity.

The Self-Preservation Eight: “Satisfaction”
The Self-Preservation Eight expresses lust through a strong need to obtain
what they need for survival. The title given to this type is “Satisfaction.”
This person has a strong desire for the satisfaction of material needs and an
intolerance of frustration, and they have a hard time being patient when it
comes to not getting immediate satisfaction of their needs and desires. This
intolerance creates a kind of ruthlessness in these Eights about going after
what they want and finding ways to get around people who might stand in
their way.
Self-Preservation Eights feel compelled to go after what they need very
directly without talking about it much—they know how to get things done
without a lot of fuss or explanations. These people are the least expressive
of the three Eight subtypes: they don’t talk much and they don’t reveal
much. This is a no-nonsense person who doesn’t bother with pretenses.
Self-Preservation Eights are preoccupied with getting things—and getting
away with things.
The driving need of Self-Preservation Eights can be described as an
exaggerated ability to take care of themselves and find ways to meet their
needs. In their focus on fulfilling their needs, they demonstrate a kind of

exaggerated selfishness. They feel omnipotent in being able to satisfy and
meet any need, and they disqualify any feeling, person, idea, or institution
that opposes their desires. They will go against whatever.
These Eights are characters who know how to survive in the most
difficult situations and how to get what they want from other people.
Naranjo sometimes refers to Self-Preservation Eights by the name
“Survival,” because they excel at generating the material support they need
to survive and satisfy their desires.
Self-Preservation Eights know how to do business—according to
Naranjo, they know how to barter and bargain and get the upper hand over
anybody. Because they are strong, powerful, direct, and productive, they
may generate dependency in others who come to rely on their control and
protection.
The Self-Preservation Eight is the most “armed” and protected of all of
the Eights—this is a more Five-ish Eight. They tend to possess a quiet
strength; they are survivors who communicate strength without feeling the
need to explain themselves. For them—at times, at least—kindness and
good intentions don’t exist. In their need to be strong to meet their needs,
they may devalue the world of feelings. And they may not be aware of the
damage they cause to others.
These Eights may seek revenge without knowing why. In this way SelfPreservation Eights differ from the Social Eight or the Sexual Eight
personality, both of which usually have a specific reason for acting in
vengeful ways. This subtype appears more aggressive than the Social Eight
(especially in men) and less openly provocative and charismatic than the
Sexual Eight.
The Self-Preservation Eight can be confused with the Sexual One
because they express a similar energy related to feeling an urgent need to
“get what’s theirs.” But Naranjo points out that the contrast between the two
types lies in the fact that the Self-Preservation Eight is fundamentally
under-social, meaning they don’t mind going against social norms or
breaking the rules, while the Sexual One is over- or hyper-social. Even
though Sexual Ones are zealous in going after what they want, they still
observe social norms, whereas Self-Preservation Eights care less about
social conventions and will make their own rules to satisfy their cravings.
Janet, a Self-Preservation Eight, speaks:

I have always felt a very strong sense of personal responsibility
for myself. I couldn’t and didn’t want to rely on anyone else to
ensure I got what I needed from life. In order to do this I have
been focused over the years on financial independence and
earning my own living—my work, my career, was everything.
When my first marriage ended this became my primary objective
for nearly a decade, to the detriment of any long-term personal
relationship. It’s not that I had ambitions to be fabulously wealthy
—it was more about ensuring that my financial health was strong
so that I felt secure and able to have control over choices about
things like buying a new car, getting a new house, or where to go
on holiday. I wasn’t a miser, and I didn’t hoard money. But I did
spend money in a sensible and responsible manner. I got a
financial advisor many years ago who has helped me with
pension planning, good mortgage deals, and investments.
I was married for the second time—to a man eleven years my
junior—and for nearly twenty years I was the breadwinner and
still retained the “power” when it came to money. This dynamic
has gradually changed over the years, and yet I find I am still the
one who focuses on our financial affairs. When I feel stressed,
this is where I find my anxiety and worry plays itself out—
imagining us destitute, homeless, and helpless, which would never
happen due to my prudent planning over the years.

The Social Eight: “Solidarity” (Countertype)
The Social Eight is the countertype of the three Eight subtypes. Social
Eights represent a contradiction: the Eight archetype rebels against social
norms, but the Social Eight is also oriented toward protection and loyalty.
They express lust and aggression in the service of life and other people.
This person is “social antisocial.” In contrast to Self-Preservation Eights,
Social Eights are more loyal, more overtly friendly, and less aggressive.
They are helpful Eights—people who are nurturing, protective, and
concerned with the injustices that happen to people—yet they also display
an antisocial aspect with regard to the rules of society.
Naranjo explains that, symbolically, this character represents the child
who became tough (or violent) in protecting his mother against his father.
This is someone who bands together with the mother and goes against the

patriarchal power and all that is associated with it: violence out of
solidarity. Archetypally, this character represents the child who has given up
on getting love from the father and allied with the mother against him.
Social Eights are very sensitive to detecting situations in which people
are being persecuted or exploited by others that hold more power. When
they detect this kind of thing, they tend to act to protect those who are less
powerful. Karl Marx, the champion of worker solidarity and outspoken
critic of capitalism, may have been a Social Eight.
Overall, this Eight appears more mellow and outgoing and less quick to
anger than the other Eights. They tend to rebel in less obvious ways. They
are very active, and they may lose themselves through constantly being in
action. They may display a disproportionate lust for projects or for
collecting things.
Socially, Social Eights like the power a group offers, and they may have
difficulty engaging in more “individualized” relationships. In extreme
cases, this Eight can tend toward megalomania. In close relationships, they
may display a lack of commitment to the partner that hides an unconscious
fear of abandonment.
In becoming a protector at too young an age, these Eights typically lose
consciousness of their own needs for love and care. While people with this
Eight subtype develop a strong ability to care for and protect others, they
unconsciously give up their own need for love and replace it with a
compensatory movement toward power and pleasure. It’s generally hard for
an Eight to make their love needs conscious, and while they can seem softer
or calmer than the other Eights, Social Eights also have a blind spot where
their own needs for love and protection are concerned.
This Eight often doesn’t look like an Eight. Ichazo called this subtype
“Friendship,” but Naranjo uses the descriptor “complicity” or “solidarity”
to distinguish the everyday, positive meaning of the word “friendship” from
what he calls the “ego game” of the Social Eights’ unconscious personality
pattern. According to Naranjo, this individual’s main drive is for something
like loyalty. The Social Eight subtype is the most intellectual of the three,
but these Eights also rebel against the dominant (patriarchal) culture. This
rebellion necessarily involves a mixture of authority and intellect because
the dominant authority in patriarchal societies tends to promote the
intellectual control of impulses and excess. While the Sexual Eight is the
most overtly anti-intellectual of the three Eight subtypes, the Social Eight

goes up against the power of authority out of a desire to protect the
oppressed and, unconsciously, a personal need for the nurturance associated
with maternal care.
Male Social Eights can look like Type Nines, and female Social Eights
may resemble Type Twos. However, these Eights can be distinguished from
Nines and Twos because they act in more direct, powerful ways, engage
more readily in conflict, and express more power and control in seeking to
protect and support other people.
Annie, a Social Eight, speaks:
I am always doing something for other people and thinking that
as soon as this current activity is finished then I’ll turn to what I
want to do just for me. When I first encountered the Enneagram I
thought I was a Two because I didn’t identify with the anger or
the need to dominate. I was phobic of anger and unaware of my
own underlying aggression. I wasn’t aware of how controlling my
efforts to help felt to others, and I would be hurt when people
pushed back and complained.
I frequently get pulled into the leadership role in groups and then
get whacked for thinking I know what’s best to accomplish the
task or project. In high school, to avoid this kind of pain, I started
saying, “I’m not a leader. Don’t look at me to get this done.” It
didn’t work. When I see something that needs doing, especially if
it benefits others, I step in and get it done.
I have always been seen as friendly and yet have not had “best”
friends that I was vulnerable with until late in life. It is hard to
admit that I need help or concern or comfort. While I care about
people and do a lot for them, I am realizing that I don’t allow
myself to have them matter that much to me. I have often left
relationships without a look back. Until recently, I have not been
the one who maintains friendships. I both yearn for the closeness
friendship provides and feel scared of it—partly because I then
feel obligated to take care of the other person no matter what.
I have been frequently hurt and puzzled by other people’s
reactions to me, and I work consciously to avoid being
experienced as “too much” or intrusive. When others experience

me this way, I often feel misunderstood. Because of this dynamic,
I feel like I have to monitor my energy and impact so others can
be comfortable. But I like the amount of energy and drive and
decisiveness I naturally have. It is easy for me to start in a certain
direction without too much planning and then make a course
correction if needed. I have always been physically active,
participating in both team and individual sports.
Fortunately, I was guided toward becoming a psychotherapist. In
that role I have had a lot of practice with leaning back to hear the
other’s experience, mirroring their truth back to them, and
offering help with an open hand. I feel my openheartedness, but
it’s more difficult to receive the love and gratitude others have for
me. Most importantly, I’ve learned to trust that each person has
their own wisdom and ability to live their life well.

The Sexual Eight: “Possession”
Sexual Eights have a strong antisocial tendency. People with this subtype
are provocative people who express lust through open rebellion—through
declaring in word and deed that their values differ from the norm. Along
with being the most rebellious of the Eight subtypes, the Sexual Eight is,
interestingly, also the most emotional.
This outspoken, rebellious Eight likes to be seen as bad – or at least they
don’t mind it -- and they tend not to feel any guilt over the rebellious things
they do. It’s almost a matter of pride for Sexual Eights to go against the
stream of convention or to disrespect rules and laws.
In childhood, many of these Eights experienced disrespect and a lack of
affection and attention from one or both parents, so they decided
(consciously or unconsciously) not to recognize maternal or paternal
authority. This first rebellion against authority became the template for their
strong rebellious tendencies.
The name given to the Sexual Eight is “Possession,” which refers to a
kind of charismatic taking over (or dominance) of the whole environment—
an energetic capture of people’s attention. These Eights display the idea of
“Possession” in that they can take over a whole scene energetically,
becoming the center of things. Sexual Eights like to feel their power by
possessing everyone’s attention. They express the idea that “the world
begins to run when they arrive.”32

Sexual Eights express a need for dominance and power over others. They
don’t want to lose control of anything or anyone, and they want to influence
people with their words. Everything—whether it is a person or a material
thing—is an object to possess. These Eights don’t seek material security;
rather, they seek to get power over people, things, and situations.
In getting and maintaining this power, Sexual Eights can be fascinating
and charismatic. Their power comes through a kind of seductiveness and
intensity that differentiates them stylistically from the other two Eight
subtypes. As Naranjo explains, these Eights have more colors in their
feathers; they are more magnetic and more outspoken. They have great
powers of seduction.
These Eights look voraciously for love, sex, and excessive pleasure in
life. They seek adventures, risks, challenges, and the thrill of an adrenaline
rush. In line with their passionate forward movement into action, they may
be particularly intolerant of weakness, dependence, and slow people.
As the most emotional of the Eights, the Sexual subtype displays a great
deal of passion that may at times get expressed through emotions that may
seem surprising to others and atypical for the other Eights. In these very
passionate, emotional Eights, there’s often a detachment of the intellect—
while Sexual Eights may be very intelligent, they express action and
passion more than contemplation in the things they do.
These Eights feel things deeply. This capacity can benefit a good
relationship, but it can be a problem when a relationship isn’t going well. In
romantic settings, Sexual Eights may encourage their partners to become
very dependent on them or to treat them as the energetic center of their
lives. They demand loyalty, but may not be faithful in return. (England’s
King Henry VIII may serve as an example.) And they tend to have
possessive relationships not only with lovers, but also with friends, objects,
places, and situations.
This subtype can usually be readily recognized as Eights and is as not
likely to be confused with other types. They may look like Sexual Fours in
that both types can be angry, emotional, and demanding, but Sexual Eights
distinguish themselves in their deeply confident (or overconfident) manner
in contrast with the Sexual Fours’ sense of inner deficiency.
Kathy, a Sexual Eight, speaks:

As a Sexual Eight, I like to have a small group of trusted and
trusting people around me. When my circle becomes too large, I
become uncomfortable and withdraw. I like to be all things to the
people in my inner circle, and when that circle becomes
unmanageable, it makes me a little “crazy.” Others can definitely
feel it when I start to pull away. Those who are closest to me
definitely notice when I am overcome by people who “need” too
much.
On the other hand, I seem to “take care” of those around me. My
sexual instinct can make this look like I am dominating or
controlling the people around me. Although I am usually very
conscious of my power over others, it is often difficult for others
to resist the temptation to indulge me. I am absolutely charismatic
and can convincingly bring others toward me without appearing
to want adulation. People tend to think of me as a “guru,” and
for the most part I lead and others follow without question. I have
been told that my power is like a narcotic to others. And it
happens without my having an awareness that it’s happening.
My sexual instinct also makes me one of those rare people who
can cross others’ usual boundaries without making them
uncomfortable. I genuinely care about others and that translates
into others feeling protected and safe in my presence. Someone
close to me made this observation and it resonates with me:
“People in your presence find themselves hanging onto your
every word…looking to you for approval…seeming submissive
and overcome with awe. There is the sense that you are
continually looking for an equal—someone who will provide that
for you.”
I have been told that I exude sexuality. I am overtly sexual; I
speak openly and frankly about sex. Perhaps it is partly for shock
value, but it is never meant to be offensive. It is an honest and
beautiful part of me and it also communicates my vulnerability. I
have been told that one cannot be in a room with me without
feeling my sexual presence or life force. I think it is part of what
makes me so appealing. The charisma is hard to resist.

Naranjo was correct about Sexual Eights. Our colors are more
vivid. As a Sexual Eight, my colors shine brightly, except for those
times when my energy is zapped by my need to be both protector
and protected. I feel an intense passion and zest for life. My
energy is bountiful and bold. My powers of seduction can be
consuming. Because I need what I give, I am not afraid to be
vulnerable. I believe it is precisely this trait that makes me a
gifted leader and teacher.

“The Work” for Type Eight:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS EIGHTS WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of limiting themselves through opposing limits
on themselves by developing a clearer awareness of their softer side,
tempering action with more thinking and feeling, and learning to moderate
their impulses and impact.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves. As we reflect on the
meaning and sources of what we observe, we are actively working to
counter automatic tendencies. For Eights, this process involves observing
the ways in which they express their power and avoid feeling weak and
dependent; exploring how they deny the deeper truth of early and ongoing
hurts and overcompensate through being strong; and making active efforts
to balance their forcefulness and autonomy with a greater awareness of their
emotional depths and relational capacities. It is particularly important for
Eights to develop a more direct relationship with their vulnerability and to
have the strength to be seen as weak.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Eights can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation aims to create enough internal space to really watch—with
fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and

doing in your everyday life. As Eights take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Rebelling against outside authority and denying (internal and external) limitations

Observe your tendency to view yourself as above all forms of authority.
Recognize what in you motivates this tendency. Note how you don’t accept
conventional limits and how you invalidate the voice of conventional
authority. Notice what forms this opposition takes, what beliefs you hold
that support this view, and what kinds of things you do when you act from a
superior sense of yourself as the ultimate authority. Notice any thoughts and
beliefs you have about yourself that might be overly grandiose—ways you
think of yourself as superior to others that you habitually don’t ever
question or doubt. Allow yourself to notice if denying your vulnerability
fuels this tendency to be grandiose. (Are you repressing your “smallness,”
and so experiencing an unconscious drive to be “big?”) Observe when you
are rebellious and what happens when you rebel. Look out for any instances
in which your inability to accept limits—whether imposed from the outside
or denied on the inside—might actually hurt or undermine you. Try to be
aware of the consequences caused by your reluctance to moderate yourself
or accept constraint.
Focusing on and acting from power and strength as overcompensation for denied powerlessness and
weakness

Observe the ways in which you take refuge in power and strength and how
doing so might be a way of avoiding or overcompensating for not wanting
to experience deeper feelings of powerlessness, weakness, or impotence.
Notice when you are feeling angry and when you feel an impulse to act on
it. What kinds of things make you angry and why? Notice what kinds of
things you do to assert yourself and express your power in the world. Note
when you think in ways that support acting powerfully without considering
other options or potential vulnerabilities the situation presents. In general,
note how you exert power as a way to avoid feeling any kind of
vulnerability. Observe your impulse to confront things and press forward as
a way of trying to obtain satisfaction at any price. If it feels difficult to
moderate your expressions of aggression, think about why. Notice what role

impulsiveness plays in your life and any tendencies you have to avoid
thinking through certain actions before you take them.
Avoiding and denying vulnerable feelings and dependence on others

Observe how difficult it is for you recognize and own your more vulnerable
emotions. Notice if you judge yourself as being weak if you allow yourself
to have a wider range of feelings, and observe the effects of that kind of
self-judgment. Note the other kinds of thoughts you have about your softer
feelings and how you might rationalize staying away from any kind of
emotional experience you label as “weakness.” Observe how you manage to
maintain a position of power and autonomy in your relationships. Notice
when your thinking supports the correctness of your view of things without
considering potential ways you might be incorrect or potential
vulnerabilities in your perspective. Notice any thoughts that operate to hide
your vulnerabilities from yourself. In particular, note any tendency you
have to be excessively harsh on yourself (or others) if an awareness of your
vulnerability arises. What kinds of things do you do to keep from being
aware of your softer feelings?

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Eights observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they were originally intended to help
you? Often, seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is
designed to do—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other
cases, with more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as
defenses can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Eights can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns of personality:
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type
Eights cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how
those patterns operate as coping strategies, Eights have the opportunity to
become more aware of how and why they turn away from their human
frailty and toward different forms of expressing power in the world. By
examining how they defy and deny as a reaction against being vulnerable,
Eights can gain insight into why they employ these defensive strategies. If
Eights can honestly tell the story of their early life, they can better
understand the ways that being strong instead of weak helped them to
survive or feel a sense of well-being. They can have more compassion for
themselves in light of the ways they may have needed to silence their own
“inner child.” If they can reflect on how “coming on strong”33 was their
way of coping in a world that punished weakness, they can get a clearer
sense of the ways their “offense as defense” life strategy still operates as a
protection.
What painful emotions are the Type Eight patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic
anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. Eights adopt a strategy that allows them to deny the
existence of painful emotions related to being small and vulnerable. They
find safety in strength and a sense of invulnerability, so they unconsciously
repress fear and other vulnerable emotions. The ways adult Eights
habitually act in the world can be seen as forms of compensation for a
potentially traumatic experience of helplessness in the face of perceived
injustices or actual mistreatment in childhood: “just as they were hurt then,
they set out to hurt others now. Just as they felt impotent then, they decided
(implicitly, and at a very early age), to avoid weakness at all costs.”34
The patterns that make up the Type Eight personality are thus a means of
denying, avoiding, and defending against a re-experiencing of painful
feelings that arose early on. Having a good offense and easy access to
aggression allows Eights to shrug aside feeling helpless, fearful, sad,
inadequate, and a variety of other painful emotions they felt being small in
a world that didn’t support their natural sensitivity and vulnerability.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Eight patterns operate in me now?

Through reflecting on how their key patterns operate, each of the three
Eight subtypes can grow their awareness of how these defensive patterns
emerge in everyday life—and in the present moment. Self-observing Eights
can catch themselves avoiding their softer, more vulnerable needs and
emotions or relating to the outside world with a compensatory stance of
forcefulness, intimidation, and independence. Insight into their early
patterns helps Eights wake up to the deeper motivations that drive their
coping strategy of being tough, active, and strong. It can be eye-opening
(and transformative) for Eights to see how they habitually and thoroughly
avoid being aware of a deep (and precious) part of who they are. By seeing
how denial of vulnerability actually makes them less alive, less available
for love and relationships, and less whole, Eights can direct some of their
motivation toward accepting and reclaiming the softer and sadder feelings
that express a beautiful part of the true Self.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Eights keep themselves from seeing?

To really increase their self-knowledge, it will be important for Eights to
remind themselves about what they don’t see when their personality
programming is driving the show. Eights taking pleasure in their sense of
power may not see how, in the name of finding safety through strength,
their forceful stance avoids a whole range of emotions and relational needs.
Eights can benefit greatly from the realization that being in touch with
vulnerable feelings, sensitivity, and needs for love and care is an essential
part of having deep relationships. This quality makes it easier for people to
care for you and get close to you. To the extent that you actively keep
yourself from seeing and feeling your own pain, sadness, loneliness, and
inadequacy, you may thwart your ability to empathize with other people
when they are having these feelings. The inability to tap into your own
depths makes it very difficult to be fully available for relationships. Total
invulnerability closes you off from your own capacity to love, to be loved,
and to grow. The freedom you feel in acting in powerful ways may keep
you from seeing how that focus on power repeats the pattern of neglect that
first caused you to have to get big and deny your child-self. Try focusing
instead on “looking for what you don’t see” to break the habit of neglecting
your softer side. By looking for the benefits of opening to vulnerability,

Eights will get more of the nurturing they deny themselves in exchange for
their defenses.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The irony of the Eight strategy is that staying safe through being less
sensitive closes off the best avenue for deeper connections with others. The
best and healthiest relationships develop when people can feel safe sharing
their deepest vulnerabilities. But if you don’t even acknowledge your
sensitive side and your softer emotions, how can you allow for the
stimulation, pleasure, and intensity of human contact that we all crave? It
can be tragic for pleasure-loving Eights to unconsciously cut themselves off
from life’s best source of fun and adventure—a full and complete
experience of human intimacy and connection. The deep satisfaction that
only healthy human love can provide can be difficult or impossible to
achieve without an awareness of your whole, vulnerable, undefended Self.
If you’re not well known to yourself in this way, you can’t make yourself
well known to the people who like and love you.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with personality
type-based knowledge is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to think, feel, and act with more choice and awareness.
In this section I provide some ideas for Eights about “what to do” after
they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation into their
sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected within the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns of your core type
described above in the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the
Enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to
study your passion (or “Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite,
the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them

Rebelling against, opposing, and denying outside authority and
(internal and external) limitations
See how rebellion against limits may lead to self-limitation. When Eights can begin to see

how their refusal to accept limits on their freedom actually limits them, they
can consider taking the risk to be less defended and more deeply available
in the world. Contrary to what they might think, growing into their “higher”
side or “oak tree–Self” actually requires them to have more understanding
and acceptance of the little, soft acorn kernel that needed to hide in such a
very hard shell to survive.
Eights often don’t show up in “self-help” contexts, perhaps because they
don’t want to submit to an authoritative source of learning outside
themselves. And this reluctance is understandable, given that Eights’
tendency toward rebellion often comes out of an early experience with
authority figures failing them. But in placing themselves above external
sources of learning, care, and “holding,” Eights can potentially end up alone
or lonely, even if they don’t always allow themselves to fully realize the
pain of it. Eights can therefore benefit from finding ways to accept
guidance, protection, and care from others, and to relax the need to push
back on help from the outside, even if it feels at first like control.
Broaden your view of who has authority over the truth. (Or, How do you know you’re not wrong?)

Eights can tend to fall into “it’s true because I say it’s true” ways of
thinking. When you are so accustomed to (defensively) seeing yourself in
the power position, it may be hard to concede the reality that you aren’t the
authority on everything. By believing so much in their position as “Top
Dog,” Eights sometimes trick themselves into believing everything they
think. And because Eights look so authoritative (and believe they are
speaking the objective truth), they can make others believe them too. So, in
the end, this Eight habit of focusing on the(ir) truth can obscure what is
actually true.
As Sandra Maitri points out, when your sense of self is primarily
grounded in the physical, your sense of reality can be more skewed than
you realize: “when the physical is the only dimension of reality that we are
perceiving, we may believe that we are seeing things as they are, but in fact
we are seeing through a distorted lens.”35 Even in science, “the most
revered of modern disciplines,” Maitri comments, being “objective—seeing

things as they are—means only giving credence to what can be perceived
and measured using our physical senses.”36 And scientific reliance on the
physical as the only source of truth persists even though scientific findings
have also shown that the expectation of the observer can affect the results.
In much the same way, Eights can adhere firmly to their own sense of truth
and its basis in their personality, even though this ego stance (by definition)
is a limited view of “the truth” seen differently from other, equally
legitimate perspectives.
For this reason, it’s important for Eights to make sure they question their
own authority once in a while and not just rebel against external sources of
power and knowledge simply out of habit. Eights can grow by learning to
accept or allow for others’ disagreement and not just believe that they have
a monopoly on what’s objectively true. If you allow yourself to check and
see if you might be wrong once in a while, you can actually deepen your
self-confidence and practice opening up to the experience of admitting a
mistake.
Learn about limits. At its extreme, having no limits can itself be very limiting. If

you push yourself to work harder and harder without observing your normal
human limitations, you can make yourself sick or hurt yourself. If you eat
too much or drink too much or play too much you can cause real damage to
yourself or others. Eights sometimes risk endangering their health, their
freedom, their relationships, and their well-being by resisting moderation
and reasonable constraints. If Eights can become more conscious of why
they have needed to be powerful and rebellious to cope, they can begin to
accept not always having to be so strong. This practice helps them to break
free of the limiting protections of their “acorn shell” personality by
developing a healthy relationship to limitation instead.

Focusing on and acting from power and strength as
overcompensation for denied powerlessness and weakness
Consult your head and your heart more before taking action. Being conscious and wise

about the actions we take often requires considering different forms of data.
Eights habitually tend to move into action without thinking or feeling things
through. When Eights see themselves moving quickly or impulsively into

action, they can benefit from experimenting with slowing down, analyzing
the situation more, and consulting their emotions for additional information.
Use your aggression as a clue to underlying feelings. One of the advantages of being an

Eight is that you have easier access to your anger and aggression than many
other personalities. This connection to anger generates power and
advantage, but it also often serves to hide the more vulnerable feelings that
motivated the anger in the first place. We all get angry when we are hurt.
Looking for what’s underneath this anger can help Eights get in touch with
feelings of pain and helplessness. When Eights have a clear sense of the
vulnerable feelings that might be motivating their anger, they are even more
powerful and constructive leaders. Eights can benefit enormously by
making it a practice to search for, recognize, and allow themselves to
experience any vulnerable feelings their anger may keep them from
noticing. Doing so gives them a deeper understanding of themselves and
more information with which to deal with the hurt that caused their anger in
the first place.
Reframe vulnerability and weakness as expressions of great strength. Like Eights, most

people in Western culture see power and strength as “good” and weakness
and vulnerable feelings like helplessness, powerlessness, and fear as “bad.”
But this value judgment is a product of the personality archetype of our
culture—it’s not objectively true. Feelings are just valid; they aren’t “right
or wrong” or “good or bad.” Eights get out of balance by relating to the
world through “strong” feelings and ways of behaving while repressing or
avoiding “weak” ways of feeling and behaving. They don’t access all of
who they are, and they stop themselves from growing into all they might
become. It is therefore very important for Eights to try to recognize the
truth of the counterintuitive idea that it takes a great deal of strength to allow yourself to
be truly vulnerable
.

Avoiding and denying the existence of vulnerable feelings and
dependence on others
Catch yourself in the act of avoiding vulnerability and dependence. Eights habitually and

automatically deny their vulnerability and dependence on others. Often, it
can seem to Eights that these important aspects of themselves just don’t

exist. But as Eights become aware of themselves and develop a greater
consciousness of their personality patterns, they have the opportunity to
show real inner toughness by integrating their vulnerability rather than
avoiding it through displays of strength. Eights that see how they deny their
vulnerability and dependence, and work to incorporate a deeper experience
of their more tender feelings bring their whole selves to interactions and
relationships. They become truly powerful and can grow to champion that
truth in a more profound and spiritually mature way.
Regularly inquire into your emotional depths and allow yourself to experience more of your feelings.

I’ve heard Eights say that they wake up angry. They can tend to dwell on
the angry side of the emotional spectrum: impatience, irritation, frustration,
and rage. Eights also have greater access to more upbeat feelings, like
excitement, than some other types, as they don’t indulge in as much
negative or limiting self-talk. But in focusing on the feelings they do tend to
feel, they unconsciously avoid—and so never or rarely feel—more
vulnerable feelings like pain, sadness, disappointment, confusion, fear, and
loss. The Eight becomes more armed than other personalities because his
coping strategy revolves around disowning vulnerability to become big and
powerful.
Eights expand their capacity for growth, relationship, and aliveness in the
present when they consciously choose to experience their emotional depths.
For this reason, it can help Eights to regularly ask themselves about what
they might be feeling that they are not aware of. With support from others
in this delicate process, Eights can learn to relax their defenses against
feeling all their feelings and practice opening up to letting in more love and
compassion.
Make needs for love more conscious. Most Eights have trouble making their needs

for love conscious. In the case of the Eight personality, the main factor in
defending against giving and receiving real love is giving up on love. Early
on, Eights may have had the sense that love was not available to them and
so it was a better idea to go for power and pleasure than to seek the
comforts that love can provide. Eights often come to believe that it’s foolish
or weak to expect to be loved, so they cut themselves off from that part of
their psyche that really needs it. But all people are moved by love (every
personality is a different form of defense against love, after all). To grow

out of the shell of our “acorn” self, we need to become more and more
aware of the ways in which we push love away even though we need and
want it. For Eights it is imperative to actively examine the ways in which
they may have given up on love. If they can reawaken their awareness of
their desire for love, Eights can open themselves up to the trust and
vulnerability true love requires.

The Inner Flow for Type Eight: Using the Arrow Lines to Chart
Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
define one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “stress–
growth” point, and its “child–heart” point map one kind of growth path
described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can be seen to
suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “stress–growth” point ahead
represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally fall back
into as a comfort in times of stress, and now must reintegrate
consciously.

Type Eight Moving Forward to Type Five: Consciously Using the
Five “Stress–Growth” Point for Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Eights brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Five, allowing for a balance between
withdrawal and forward momentum and between thinking and acting as a
way to marshal inner resources to develop “nonattachment.” Not
surprisingly, the Eight move to Five may represent an extreme response to
an intense experience of stress, as it can be a mode of retreat that Eights are
driven to when their normal reliance on power and action has failed. To the
normally expressive Eight, the experience of Five may feel like a bunker
where they take shelter when threatened or when conditions have dealt
them a severe setback. The Five Point offers Eights a way to protect
themselves through withdrawal to a remote place of safety where they can
regroup rather than use power and strength. But this experience of Five,
when consciously and mindfully managed, can help Eights develop a
capacity for careful analysis conducted from a distance in place of
overreliance on force, aggression, and bold (sometimes precipitous) action
to get what they need.
The Eight working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools healthy Fives use: analytical skills and economical use of energy and
resources in support of self-protection and self-expression. The Five stance
has a basis in observation, objective thinking, and a cautious focus on
boundaries, and it can serve to balance out Eights’ tendencies toward
impulsivity, excess, and intimidation. Fives’ judicious use of inner
resources can help Eights focus more intentionally on self-regulation and

moderation in the things they do. The mental activity, conscientious
research, and planning characteristic of Fives can remind Eights to think
more thoroughly about what they want to do before they move into action.
And the way in which Fives automatically prioritize their own safety,
maintaining a safe distance from danger, can help Eights develop a more
conscious ability to take care of their “inner child.” Valuing their need for
time alone, energetic self-regulation, and personal space balances the Eights
habitual reliance on brute force and over-action.

Type Eight Moving Back to Type Two:
Consciously Using the “Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early
Issues and Find Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Eights calls for them to reclaim their ability to
actively open up to their empathy for others and their need to be
appreciated. Eights’ early impulses to be seen and loved by others were not
particularly recognized and supported in childhood. As children, Eights
may have felt that they had to decide between the vulnerability of needing
affection and the power of not needing anything from anybody – and they
chose to take refuge in a position of strength.
Without awareness around the move to Type Two, Eights can act out the
Two habits of “giving to get” and seducing through charm and helpfulness.
They may compulsively and expansively do things for others, give advice,
or express physical affection as a way of forging connections. Eights may
go to Two in anxious ways—in an unconscious search for the comfort of
relationship when they are stressed—or as a way to act out the disowned
need for love they usually don’t allow themselves to feel. As Sandra Maitri
observes, “within the tough and no-nonsense Eight who delights in testing
her grit…dominating and controlling life, and triumphing over adversity,
lies a needy, clingy and lonely little Two-ish child who is desperate to be
loved and held.”37
Navigated consciously, however, Eights can use the move to Two
developmentally, to reestablish a healthy balance between attuning to
others’ feelings and needs and asserting their own needs. Eights can focus
on the qualities of this “child–heart” point to understand the needs they may
have had to deny in themselves in their youth in order to get along in the
world. Moving back to Two can thus be a way for Eights to consciously re-

engage a lost sense of their needs for comfort, love, and care, and their
desire to adapt to and please others as a way of relating. Eights often pride
themselves on their independence and on the fact that they “don’t care what
anyone thinks of them.” But this habitual posture is a defense adopted as a
protection against an insensitive world. For this reason, the move to Two
can be both a way for Eights to search for a sense of security through love
and a way for them to embrace and reintegrate important parts of
themselves they had to deny.
By reincorporating Type Two qualities, Eights can consciously remind
themselves that it’s okay to care about what other people think and feel
about you; and that it’s important to value your needs for love,
understanding, affection, and acceptance. Instead of hiding their need for
love and connection in a pose of strength and autonomy, Eights can seek to
embody the high side of Two and open up a channel to loving and
supportive relationships. They can use the wisdom of Two to adapt to meet
the needs of others and to express their care and affection to other people
more consciously. In this way, Eights can balance their talent for acting
boldly in the world with the capacity for experiencing the vulnerability of
needing support and care. They can use their Two “child–heart” point as a
way of reclaiming their inner child’s need for care and affection and
opening up to a deeper participation in the give-and-take of loving
relationships.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Lust and Aiming for Innocence
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map because it highlights a usable
“vertical” path of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the
case of Type Eight, the Vice (or passion) of the type is lust; its opposite, the
Virtue, is innocence. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to
Virtue conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion
functions and consciously work toward the embodiment of our higher
Virtue, the more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and
fixated patterns (the “acorn shell”) of our type and evolve toward our
“higher” side or “oak tree–Self.”
As Eights become more familiar with their experience of lust and
develop the ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work

further by making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to
the passion of lust. In the case of Type Eight, the Virtue of innocence
represents a state of being that Eights can attain by consciously manifesting
their higher capacities.
Innocence is a way of being that is free from guilt, pure of heart, and
naturally connected to the flow of our animal wisdom and nature as a
whole. This higher Virtue encompasses the ability to wake up to the animal
or instinctual level of our functioning and to see and feel how it comes from
a pure source in the natural order of things.
Type Eight, like the “id” or the “libido,” represents the raw sexual and
instinctual energy that animates the lives of all animals and allows us to tap
into the powerful energy of our physical selves. When this energy is put to
work in service of the ego, however, it gets limited and distorted through its
participation in the defensive personality structure. As a part of the
conditioned personality, lust activates the energy that fuels the drive we all
have to get what we need to survive as a species. However, in modern
society, there’s more than a hint of “badness” behind this drive to
energetically go for whatever you need without restriction. The idea of
“sin,” and the fear of unrestricted instinctual impulse, has fueled cultural
ideas that make us label sex and other urges as somehow wrong, when
nothing is more fundamental than following our inherent animal wisdom.
And it is this kind of cultural repression or judgment of our animal drives
that the Eight personality naturally moves against.
Innocence, then, represents our ability to become conscious of the
activity of our animal drives and our instinctual impulses for physical
satisfactions, and to free up the life energy that can become trapped in
defending our egos through the push-pull around our instinctual movement.
Through mindful awareness of the ways in which we rebel against the
repression of our instincts, we allow ourselves to experience ourselves more
in the natural “flow of reality” regarding our physical drives.38
Embodying innocence as an Eight means that you have examined how
your lust drives you. You have worked on being more aware of your
unconscious tendency to go against others and the rules they create and to
lose contact with your deeper sense of emotional truth and purity as a result.
Achieving a state of innocence means you are directly connected with your
own life force on all levels—the intellectual, the emotional, and the
physical—so that you don’t have to take refuge in a show of power or

strength to assert yourself. Rather you can deeply trust in the purity of your
impulses and intentions as you interact with others to get what you need.
Maitri cites Ichazo in defining innocence as an experience of reality and
the connection to its flow, and the innocent being as one who “responds
freshly to each moment, without memory, judgment, or expectation.”39 For
Eights, releasing lust and aiming to inhabit a state of innocence means that
they allow themselves to align with the natural flow of reality and be in the
present moment without fearing being too much, wanting too much,
receiving too little, or re-experiencing the hurts of the past. By aspiring to
innocence, Eights release themselves from any guilt or pride connected to
their desires, and they open up to a direct experience of their own life force
and its connection to themselves, others, and the world around them.

Specific Work for the Three Type Eight Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
Whatever type you are, the path from observing your passion to finding its
antidote is not exactly the same for each set of subtypes. The path of
conscious self-work has been characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and
grace:”40 the “grit” of our personality programming, the “grind” of our
efforts to grow, and the “grace” that comes to us from doing our work in
conscious and positive ways. According to Naranjo, each subtype has to
grind, or exert effort, against something slightly different. This insight is
one of the great benefits of understanding the three distinct subtypes of each
of the nine types.
Self-Preservation Eights can travel the path from lust to innocence by learning to

allow for a wider range of feelings; expressing more of their thoughts and
emotions with others; and developing more of a sense of trust related to the
fulfillment of their needs. Self-Preservation Eights often feel a sense of
urgency around their need for the resources required to live a good life.
They usually feel like they have to “go it on their own” and work hard to
get the things they want and need. In line with this drive, they naturally
develop the skills and abilities they need to be strong, self-reliant, and selfsupporting. But this stance can intensify rather than alleviate their sense of
insecurity around getting their needs met. And this (usually unconscious)
insecurity may be denied and overcompensated for when they work
excessively hard in the belief that they have to be autonomous. If you are a

Self-Preservation Eight, you can grow toward an experience of innocence
by slowing down, learning to rely on others more, and having more faith in
your ability to get what you need without having to expend so much effort
and energy. Expand your ability to communicate what you need and want to
others, whether it is about money and resources or love, care, and
companionship.
Social Eights can travel the path from lust to innocence by learning how to take

care of themselves in the same ways they feel moved to take care of others.
Social Eights focus on protecting and supporting others as a way of acting
out their own denied needs for protection and support, so it’s important for
them to embody innocence by being more actively and regularly aware of
their own inner child and its needs for love and safety. These Eights grow in
direct proportion to the degree to which they can see how they displace
their need for love and support into taking action to be powerful in the
world. It may be important for them to actually think about themselves as
innocent children, as we all understand that all children deserve love, care,
and protection—and that all children are naturally innocent. Opening up to
the innocence involved in allowing themselves to be loved, taken care of,
and vulnerable—which may have been impossible when they were young—
allows Social Eights to reintegrate the child inside them that they had to
abandon when they needed to get big fast in order to deal with the world.
can travel the path from lust to innocence by reminding
themselves that they are lovable and “good enough” as they are, and that
they don’t need to be provocative, superior, or extraordinary in order to be
worthy of other people’s devotion. It may help these Eights to explore the
reasons behind their need to rebel and to possess everyone’s attention. The
Sexual Eight’s pattern of being powerful and charismatic often serves to
cover over a hurt child who didn’t get the love and attention he or she
deserved. If you are a Sexual Eight, and you can allow yourself to own and
reintegrate the lonely, needy child inside you, you can take the charge out of
your defensive need to have control over what happens and to be the center
of everything. You have so much to offer in terms of your strength and your
passion and your emotional energy, but you can be even more potent and
present in the things you do and the relationships you build when you can
allow yourself to have an ongoing sense of the innocence and purity of your
Sexual Eights

deeper feelings, needs, and intentions. This is the true heart and the
powerful potential of innocence. When you can bring that spirit into the
things you do and share more of your energetic space with others in
conscious ways, you can be truly powerful.

Conclusion
JUST AS THE EIGHT POINT REPRESENTS the way we become big and powerful
to get what we need when it doesn’t work to be small and vulnerable, the
Eight path of growth shows us all how to transform the lustful energy
behind our instinctual drives into a conscious sense of purpose and trust
about who we are and what we can be. In each of the Type Eight subtypes,
we see a specific character who shows us what is possible when we can turn
lustful rebellion against limitations on our animal power into an awakened
ability to feel, own, and integrate our most vulnerable emotions and
innocent needs for love. In this way, Type Eights teach us all about the
beauty of innocence when they can embody a state of being that flows in
ease and harmony with the natural world through the alchemy of selfobservation, self-development, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 5

The Point Seven Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
If you can’t dazzle them with brilliance, baffle them with bull.
—W. C. Fields

Men are only as loyal as their options.
—Bill Maher

TYPE SEVEN REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who seeks pleasure in
different forms as a distraction from the discomfort, darkness, and downside
of life. This archetype’s drive is to defend against the experience of pain
using intelligence, imagination, charm, and enthusiasm, and to avoid fear
through an optimistic outlook.
The Jungian concept of the “puer” or the “divine child” is another form
of this archetype. It represents a “symbol for future hopes…the potentiality
of life, newness itself… frivolity, pleasure, and play.”1 Jung characterizes
this archetype as the “Eternal Child,” who resists growing up as a way of
trying to avoid taking on responsibility, along with its commitments,
encumbrances, and difficulties.
This archetypal character predominantly focuses on the lighter sides of
life, the “enlivening, charming, and refreshing elements of human
experience,”2 avoiding the darker Shadow aspects of human experience.
The Type Seven personality and the puer archetype embody a highly
positive idealism, a youthful enthusiasm, and a focus on future hopes. This
archetype’s dark side reflects the opposite of these qualities in its
unconscious unwillingness to face the pain of separation, aging, and
mortality.
Type Sevens represent that tendency in all of us to focus on the positive
parts of life, on the upside, on the light instead of the dark. In much the
same way that the Enneagram’s Type Four represents the human tendency
to focus on the Shadow—on what’s missing or feels bad—Type Seven

typifies that part of us that looks to the light as a way of avoiding the
Shadow. This attraction toward positive feelings like excitement and
happiness, and the difficulty of experiencing uncomfortable feelings like
sadness, fear, or pain, is a universal human experience. As Sandra Maitri
explains, “aversion to pain and attraction to pleasure is hard-wired into our
physiology.”3 We all, to one extent or another, seek refuge in pleasant
feelings as a way of evading painful emotions.
In a larger sense, from the point of view of the esoteric wisdom tradition
behind the Enneagram, much of what we label as “good” and “bad” or
“positive” and “negative” is defined in neutral terms. (We sometimes think
of someone who is angry a lot as “bad,” when anger is not intrinsically
negative.) The value judgments we place on these different emotional states
are a result of our cultural conditioning and our animal instincts. Our
attraction to pleasure and our aversion to pain are universal human drives.
But if we cannot develop an awareness of the ways we automatically
distance ourselves from the “bad” and the “painful,” we will impede our
ability to grow.
Pain is part of what motivates the desire for personal development, and
conscious suffering represents a key part of the growth process. Most
people decide to do the difficult work of the “inner journey” in order to ease
their suffering and find happiness. We must necessarily face our fears and
childhood pain in the course of this journey, like an acorn in the Chapter 2
analogy has to “go underground and have its shell crack open.” For any of
us to become all that we can be—expand into the “oak tree” of our higher
Self—we have to find the courage to see wisdom and truth in the darkness
as well as the light. To truly develop, we must face our fears and our
Shadow parts. This hard truth is what the Seven’s path of growth teaches us.
The Seven archetype expresses several dimensions of the personality’s
movement toward pleasure and away from pain. Sevens automatically
retreat into their intellect to rationalize away difficult emotional states. They
actively seek out fun and stimulating experiences as a way of avoiding the
darker side of life. Sevens move and think at a fast pace, allowing them to
outrun or outwit whatever discomfort may arise.
In the Enneagram framework of personality, Type Sevens are typically
playful, optimistic, inventive, adventurous, fun-loving, and imaginative. As
one of my Seven friends has frequently noted about himself, he is “fun at
parties” and “has a way with the ladies.” Sevens have a gift for seeing the

best in people and in situations, and they bring excitement and enthusiasm
to the things they do. They are also creative, innovative, and flexible
thinkers with a natural facility for generating multiple ideas and options.
They are characteristically upbeat, friendly, and energetic. The specific
“superpower” of Type Seven is the power of positive thinking—the ability
to see interesting ideas and positive possibilities almost anywhere.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Sevens’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel,” as their talent
for reframing “negatives” into “positives” can cause them to ignore
important data that doesn’t fit their positive frame. Although they are fun
and enjoyable companions, Sevens have difficulty in relationships when
called on to confront problems and deal with the pain or discomfort of
conflict. And while they excel at brainstorming, their dislike of the routine
and mundane aspects of life can lead them to be avoidant, distracted,
irresponsible, and noncommittal in long term projects. Sevens often find it
hard to move forward in life because they resist dealing with deeper
emotions and sticky situations. And they frequently take refuge in a
superficial or overly optimistic way of viewing things that discounts the
hard realities involved. However, when Sevens can balance their positive
and enthusiastic view of life with an ability to engage more deeply and with
the full range of emotions, they can be enlivening, inspiring, and dedicated
partners and friends.
The Type Seven Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey: Aeolia and
Aeolus, the Master of the Winds
When Odysseus and his men reach Aeolia, they find a place that
epitomizes the Type Seven personality. This sumptuous island has
no fixed location; it moves with the wind, which its ruler, Aeolus,
controls. The Aeolians enjoy continuous feasting and festivities as
they float about. Life is easy, fun, and comfortable—by design.
Aeolus has an easy and comfortable solution to Odysseus’s
problem, of course. He ties all the winds but the West Wind into a
sack and has Odysseus store the bag in the hold of his ship so
“there should be no wrong breath of wind”4 to blow them in the
wrong direction. Then he sets the West Wind free to blow
Odysseus and his ships on their way west toward home.

Thus aided, the Greeks sail continuously for ten days until they
have
Ithaca within sight. Odysseus is exhausted from working the
ropes day
and night, and he succumbs to his fatigue. While he is sleeping,
his men get curious about that bag of winds, thinking there might
be treasure inside:
The crews began to mutter among themselves…sure I was
hauling troves of gold and treasure home…“ Look at our
captain’s luck—so loved by the world…Heaps of lovely
plunder he hauls home from Troy, while we who went
through slogging just as hard, we go home-empty handed.”5
The crew opens the sack while Odysseus sleeps, thinking that
Aeolus has given him gold and silver and they will take some for
themselves. They unleash all the “blowing winds” inside, creating
a furious windstorm that blasts them all back to Aeolia.
Now, however, the Greeks’ return to Aeolia is only spoiling the
party. It proves that these men are the worst kind of unpopular:
the gods hate them. Odysseus’s pleas fall on deaf ears, and he and
his men are ejected from the otherwise carefree island.
Certainly, the creative optimism and innovative spirit the Type
Seven personality exudes can put a breeze in anyone’s sails. New
encounters, sensuous pleasures, and pleasant experiences are a
big part of what makes life worth living. But as Odysseus’s crew
found out, focusing only on getting our share of the comforts of
life causes trouble. No one can truly have their own private
Aeolia, where the cares of the world are intrusions to be
dispatched or avoided. Bobbing on the surface in a land of
endless festival will always be just another way of drifting.

The Type Seven Personality Structure
LOCATED ON THE LEFT SIDE OF THE ENNEAGRAM, Type Sevens belong to the
“head-based” triad, associated with the core emotion of fear and a central
concern with safety. Although Sevens are part of the “fear triad,” they
usually don’t act afraid and may not feel much fear at all. Within this group
of three types, Sixes overdo fear, Fives stave off fear by skillfully avoiding

it, and Sevens underplay their fear. They defend themselves with mental
intelligence, and their main coping strategy operates to move them away
from fear and related feelings.

As mental types, Sevens have a distinct pattern of thinking, sometimes
referred to as “monkey mind.” This style is characterized by a rapid
switching from one line of thinking to another according to the associations
forming quickly and automatically in their minds. Another way of
describing this predominant Type Seven quality would be to say that they
have “synthesizing minds” that allow them to easily find links and
commonalities among seemingly different subjects.
Sevens do share the other two head-based personalities’ underlying
concern with safety, but they avoid anxiety and fear by moving toward
happy feelings, a positive outlook, and pleasurable experiences. Their main
focus is seeking pleasure, which can take the form of fun activities, sensual
enjoyments, or interesting things to think about.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Seven
Sevens often report having had a good experience early in life, and most
recall having a generally happy childhood. And their early life may indeed
have been pleasant and carefree—but certainly for some Sevens, selective
recall makes it better in memory than it really was. This rosy recollection is
not surprising because Sevens’ central coping strategy is to automatically
reframe negatives into positives—to avoid the dark side and focus attention
on the bright side. As Naranjo suggests, sometimes “memory in such a case
supports fantasy to deny suffering.”6

While Sevens often do experience a prolonged period of childhood
satisfaction, many say that they experienced some sort of fear-inducing
event, which they felt ill-equipped to deal with. Often there was a “fall from
paradise” at a particular point in time, an experience that motivated the
child to unconsciously cope with his fear by withdrawing back into an
earlier stage of development in which he felt secure and omnipotent. By
psychologically backing up and reverting to a slightly earlier stage in which
they felt good and had a sense of control, Sevens take refuge in a happier,
safer-feeling experience. From then on, when feelings of anxiety, fear, or
pain threaten to emerge, Sevens employ a similar strategy: they
automatically move away from trouble and toward thoughts, feelings, or
imagined experiences that are stimulating, fun, and pleasant—often without
having the conscious awareness that they are making this shift.
Type Seven individuals thus adopt the unconscious survival strategy of
pulling back from distressing aspects of reality by moving toward what’s
positive in terms of pleasurable thoughts, fantasies, and plans. This defense
provides the child (and later, the adult) with an effective strategy for
avoiding pain and other uncomfortable emotions. It also leads Sevens to
develop skills and strengths like an active imagination, a positive
temperament, and an inventive mind. But avoiding harsh realities makes it
hard for Sevens to handle (or even register) difficult emotions in naturally
challenging situations. Automatically avoiding such things becomes
habitual and unconscious. As the thinking behind this Seven life strategy
goes, why would you choose to be sad (or anxious or uncomfortable) when
you could be happy instead? Feeling good rather than bad seems to Sevens
like a choice they can continually decide to make—and the thought of
doing otherwise seems absurd to them.
In the history of many Sevens, often there was a good relationship with
one parent, usually the mother, and a more challenging relationships with
the other, usually the father. As Naranjo explains, the Seven most
commonly had an authoritarian father “whose excessive dominance and
sternness was experienced as lovelessness and not only contributed to an
implicit judgment to the effect that authority is bad, but to the experience of
an authority that is too strong to be met head-on.”7 A typical familial
pattern for Sevens with regard to mothers, or mother figures, is that they are
often experienced as “overprotective, permissive, and indulgent.”8
However, the gender roles may be reversed in some cases, with the mother

playing the “paternal” authoritarian role and the father being perceived as
more loving.
Based on their parental experience, Sevens get the idea early on that
authority equals limitation and control from the outside. And Sevens, along
with Type Eights, are among the types who most dislike being told what to
do.
Sevens respond by retreating into the mind—and, more specifically, into
imagining a positive future, best-case scenarios, and stimulating ideas and
options. This distraction functions as a way of turning away from a
potentially negative reality that might evoke unpleasant emotions. Thus,
Sevens develop a talent for reframing a troubling present into a more
positive and intellectually stimulating experience. In this way, as Naranjo
suggests, Sevens “defend themselves through intelligence.”9
Having learned to view fun and pleasure and “soft” forms of rebellion as
strategic ways of meeting the dangers of being controlled and avoiding bad
emotions or getting stuck in discomfort of any kind, the Seven becomes a
pleasure-seeker and a good talker. More than just open-minded and
exploratory, their search for stimulation through interesting and engaging
experiences represents a way to defend against present discomforts: it
“takes them from an insufficient here to a promising there.”10 They
automatically avoid dealing with the threat of immediate unpleasantness by
thinking about what they have to look forward to. They develop a mental
focus on future possibilities and options as a way of distracting themselves
from a deeper fear of getting stuck in unpleasant feelings and being limited
by circumstances beyond their control.
Sam, a Type Seven, describes his childhood situation and the
development of his coping strategy:
Sam was the youngest of Seven children and his mother’s favorite.
He was eight years younger than his nearest sibling. His mother
had wanted to have him as a way to repair her difficult marriage
with his father. Sam remembers his early life as one in which he
was in caught in the middle between his parents’ conflict. He had
the sense that his mother really loved him, but his father was very
angry and always yelling. Often they would fight over him and he
would be put right in the middle of their battles. In this difficult

situation, Sam retreated into the world of his mind. He read a lot
and dreamed of places he would go and things he would do.
One time, after a particularly bad fight, he remembers his mother
taking him to a hotel to get away from his father. As his mother
cried, he recalls focusing on looking out the window and deciding
he would enjoy the rain that was falling. He got intensely
fascinated by beauty of the rain drops.
When his mom died when he was nine years old and he was left
with a father who didn’t want him around, his underlying
insecurity increased and he continued to take refuge in his
imagination. To this day he doesn’t like controversy and conflict.
Although he draws on his high energy and quick mind as assets in
confronting people in court as a lawyer, he acknowledges that he
doesn’t deal very well with conflict in his personal life. If he is
alone he will simply ignore any anxiety he might feel, and when
he is out with friends he will get “charismatically nervous.” He
still reads a lot and he still retreats to his imagination and
embellishes things in his mind as a way to escape from what
might be happening in his life that feels uncomfortable.

The Main Type Seven Defense Mechanisms: Rationalization and
Idealization
Type Sevens’ characteristic ease with reframing things into positive terms is
connected to their primary defense mechanisms, rationalization and idealization.
Rationalization as a defense entails finding good reasons for doing
whatever you want to do, seeing things however you want to see things, or
believing whatever you want to believe. Naranjo cites Ernest Jones as
saying that “rationalization is the invention of a reason for an attitude or
action the motive of which is not acknowledged.”11
All of us rationalize to create theoretical support for what we do or what
happens to us. This allows us to buffer ourselves from the pain we might
feel when something unfortunate happens to us or when we want to do
something even though it’s not good for us. If we’ve suffered a setback, we
can think, “it was a good learning experience,” which may make it easier to
avoid feelings of defeat or failure. If we want to eat another piece of cake,
but we know we shouldn’t for health or diet reasons, we can say to

ourselves, “it’s just a small piece,” or “it’s okay because I will run five
miles in the morning.”
Using rationalization, Sevens can find good reasons for whatever they
want to do, think, or feel. And while finding a rationale for what you are
doing serves as a defense in protecting you from having bad feelings
connected to your behavior, it also keeps you from direct contact with your
real motives and the feelings connected to the things you do.
Seeing things in largely positive terms—or, more specifically, needing to
see things in positive terms—also leads Sevens to use the defense
mechanism of idealization. Idealization allows Sevens to perceive people
and experiences as being better than they are, imbuing them with
superhuman or super-positive qualities; this allows Sevens to avoiding
reckoning with any flaws those people or things might have or any lessthan-positive emotions they might inspire.
In some ways, of course, idealization can be a normal component of
loving someone. Children idealize parents when they want to believe that
someone loves them and will keep them safe. But when the Seven idealizes,
they often do so to defend against feelings they might naturally have about
the real person they are with. When this happens, idealization can keep
them in a fantasy relationship instead of the one they are actually in. This
can lead Sevens (often without their knowledge) to stay on the surface in a
relationship and avoid a deeper experience of who the other person is, lest
they tarnish the idealized (highly positive) version they have created in their
heads.

The Type Seven Focus of Attention
Sevens tend to be self-referencing. In contrast to other types, like Twos and
Nines, that focus more on other people, Sevens focus primarily on their
own inner experience and needs, and, especially, their own thoughts. Since
the main mode of psychological defense for the Seven is the escape into
fantasy and positive mental possibilities, Sevens tend to focus their
attention inward, on their own plans and preferences. This habit is essential
to managing their experience by directing their internal thought processes.
It can also lead Sevens to (often unconsciously) use their (mental)
intelligence to manipulate others, as they naturally assert their own agenda
by automatically focusing on their own wants, needs, and self-interest.

Sevens automatically pay attention to the positive data in a situation and
can accentuate and expand it in their minds in a glass-half-full way until
they see a best-case scenario unfolding. Unconsciously motivated to avoid
pain, they want to feel good and stay upbeat and so tend to overlook or
downplay the negative data in the environment, instead focusing on what
will help them stay positive.
Characteristically pleasure-seeking, Sevens see the world as their oyster.
They want to keep the mood as high as possible as much of the time as
possible, so Sevens focus on experiencing the best of what life has to offer:
the finest foods, the best wines, the most exciting locations and activities.
Sevens happily earned their other descriptions as “the Epicure” or “the
Adventurer.” They perceive life in terms of endless opportunities and have
an easy time imagining and moving toward stimulating experiences and
possibilities. Their enthusiasm and readiness to be fascinated makes them
very active people who energetically pursue a range of different hobbies or
personal interests.
Sevens are the most optimistic of all the Enneagram types, and they
habitually focus their attention on what is possible in the future. They can
be charming visionaries with a thirst for new and stimulating experiences.
Sevens sincerely believe that they can actualize all they can imagine for
themselves—that they can attain whatever they aspire to.
Being future-oriented in this way allows Sevens to live in an imagined
reality that’s based on a positive vision of how they would like things to be.
This idealized vision operates as a buffer against being or feeling in the
present: Sevens think about future plans so they don’t have to experience
any potentially boring or negative reality that might be occurring in the
present. A good Seven friend of mine says that as he goes through his day
he “always needs to have something to look forward to.”
Sevens also like to have a lot of options for enjoyable things to do so they
can choose the most desirable option on the fly. With multiple possibilities
in play, their attention automatically shifts to the best option if a particular
plan becomes untenable or less desirable. This flexibility can make Sevens
hedge their commitments—when you ask them to make a commitment,
they may (enthusiastically) say “yes,” but they often really mean “maybe.”
As they mentally sort for the best option, sometimes they need to bail out of
a commitment at the last minute when another possibility offers a better
experience. Sevens dislike limits, especially real-life constraints inhibiting

their ability to move away from potential discomforts. Sevens have a kind
of soft anti-authoritarian stance, for example one that might look to equalize
authority within hierarchies to prevent those below them or above them
from controlling them in any way.
Sevens’ resistance against constraints also takes the form of an intense
dislike of routine chores like paperwork or housework, which are inherently
constraining. Their aversion to tedium also makes them gravitate toward
work that doesn’t involve repetition or a focus on boring details. Whenever
possible, Sevens will define (or reframe) work tasks as fun so that even
work gets turned into an enjoyable way to spend their time. The Seven habit
of avoiding boredom or stagnation also fuels a tendency toward
multitasking. They usually have several things—lines of thought and
activities—going at the same time.

The Type Seven Emotional Passion: Gluttony
The “passion” or “chief feature” associated with Type Seven is gluttony. But
gluttony as an Enneagram passion is not defined as a desire to consume
large portions of food (according to the usual meaning of this word). In the
context of the Enneagram, gluttony suggests an (often insatiable) hunger for
stimulating experiences of all kinds, such as good meals, pleasurable
interactions with others, interesting conversations, or exciting travel plans.
Naranjo points out that all of the passions operate as an attempt to fill up an
inner emptiness. Gluttony in this sense represents a desire to take in as
many novel and superlative experiences as possible in an attempt to
compensate for a feeling of underlying fear or insecurity. Maitri points out
that gluttony motivates a desire to taste as many things as possible; that it is
a “wanting more” that leads to taking in but not filling up. As “consuming
rather than digesting is the focus,” Sevens’ gluttony for experience usually
leads to a sense of dissatisfaction, which leads to (and is masked by) the
pursuit of further stimulation.12
Naranjo describes gluttony as a “passion for pleasure.” He explains that
if we understand gluttony more broadly, we see that it constitutes a kind of
hedonism and a generalized susceptibility to temptation that can end up
inhibiting Sevens’ growth. And while all of the passions have this quality of
being both a key motivator and an eventual trap, it may be hard to see
gluttony as an obstacle at first, especially because Sevens tend to be so

charming and convincing in their pursuit of pleasure. It is as if they are
asking, “What could be so wrong with wanting to have a good time?”
The passion of gluttony motivates Sevens to crave more and more—more
pleasure, more of what feels good, and more thrilling experiences. Their
pursuit of fun and pleasure can have a romantic cast, as an idealistic and
excited search for more unique and extraordinary forms of fun and
adventure. And while this can make the Seven attractive to others, who may
get drawn in by their conviction that more is better and life is an exciting
world of possibilities, it can also make it difficult for the Seven to establish
deep relationships. The problem with this gluttony for pleasure-filled
experience is that “insatiability [is] veiled over by an apparent satisfaction”
and “frustration is hidden behind enthusiasm.”13 While Sevens’ gluttony for
experience arises from a desire to avoid suffering and emptiness, gluttony
actually is their suffering.14 Their gluttony for happiness is a way of running
away from fear, especially the fear of pain.
So, while gluttony drives Sevens to continually seek out new and better
forms of entertainment and stimulation, this compulsion to “want more”
ultimately leaves Sevens emotionally empty. Pursuing pleasure doesn’t lead
to a satisfying feeling of contentment, because the strategy is mainly a
defense against emotions Sevens don’t want to feel. Despite their desire not
to be limited, they constrain their own emotional life by experiencing things
“from the safe remove of their minds.”15 They act out the fear they don’t let
themselves feel through a gluttonous search for mental stimulation that at
the same time comforts them and prevents them from engaging with their
authentic emotions. Even as Sevens talk about wanting deep engagement,
they also fear it: their gluttony drives them around in circles.

The Type Seven Cognitive Mistake:
“Believing I’m Okay and You’re Okay Isn’t Always Okay”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and this continues even after the mental models that
create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore. While the passion
shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation” or
“cognitive mistake” preoccupies the personality’s thought processes. Type
Sevens’ cognitive stance centers on beliefs that support the passion of

gluttony by focusing on the idea that the best way to live is to keep your
mood up, have options, and be optimistic.

Under the sway of their personality’s life strategy and patterns, Sevens
sincerely hold beliefs that keep them focused on the positive and help them
mentally defend against getting close to their pain. This cognitive approach
to life expresses a deeper (often unconscious) fear that if they don’t have
options—and if they don’t expend energy to stay happy—they will get
stuck in a painful experience they don’t believe they could tolerate.
Underneath their positive mental attitude and their cognitive focus on
happiness and pleasure, Sevens fear getting stuck in feelings of boredom,
anxiety, sadness, depression, discomfort, or pain.
Thus, the following organizing principles underlie and support Type
Seven’s focus of attention.16

I must always have pleasant options of fun things to do and
think about so that I will feel good and not bad.
If I am not focused on planning for and having positive
experiences, I will get stuck in a painful feeling that I would
much rather avoid.
I must avoid experiencing pain, discomfort, or boredom,
because if I allow myself to experience these emotions, I will
likely become stuck in them for a long time, perhaps even
forever.

Being trapped in a negative emotional experience is something
to be avoided at all costs.
I can avoid pain and other negative emotions if I stay focused
on the positive and seek out pleasant experiences.
Limitations of any kind lead to negative feelings, and they
should and can be avoided.
By moving from one stimulating experience to another, I can
keep discomfort at bay and keep life exciting.
Why would anyone want to dwell in discomfort if they could
be happy instead? Being happy and staying upbeat is a
sensible, reasonable, and worthy goal.
I won’t be able to tolerate feelings of frustration, sadness, or
pain, and thus must avoid them by always looking on the
bright side.
Life is about sampling as many good and fun things as
possible.
While some of these Type Seven core beliefs are positive and lifeaffirming, they can be just as harmful and limiting in the end as any of the
more obviously negative sets of mental organizing principles. In a way that
might seem counterintuitive, Sevens can have a “maladaptive” or selfdefeating belief in the need to stay positive. Their excessive positivity is
really a coping strategy designed to perpetuate the illusion that we can live
our lives to the fullest even as we avoid the inevitable pain of living.

The Type Seven Trap:
“Focusing Exclusively on Happiness Can Lead to Unhappiness”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Seven
leads the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the
limitations of the personality cannot resolve. As Sandra Maitri observes,
Sevens’ “movement away from pain…ends up creating its own kind of
anguish.”17

Given their coping strategy and its associated focus of attention, Sevens
typically end up caught in the conflict between the habit of avoiding pain
through pursuing pleasure and the reality that you can’t outrun your pain
forever. The defensive maneuvers Sevens employ to avoid discomfort can,
in the end, leave them depressed when they eventually realize that avoiding
difficult feelings and realities doesn’t make them go away.
In trying to avoid pain by focusing on pleasure, we inevitably create
more pain for ourselves. When you avoid the bad stuff, it doesn’t go away
—it just gets swept under the carpet where someone can trip on it later.
When we don’t deal with problems in the present because we can’t bring
ourselves to focus on life’s difficulties, we are bound to make life more
difficult for ourselves when our challenges inevitably mount up and
overflow.
Although we can all understand the appeal of wanting to avoid the pain
in life, Sevens perpetuate their discomfort and underlying fear by trying to
ignore the darker aspects of life. In the same way that light always casts a
shadow, the light side of life that Sevens celebrate so well always has a
corresponding dark side, which they often refuse to see.
When your life strategy is based on the illusory idea that focusing on the
bright side will make the dark side go away, you set yourself up for
surprising disappointment and failure. Keeping things light is an attractive
option for fun and ease of movement, but when it’s used to avoid facing the
challenges inherent in human life and relationships, things have a way of
taking a turn for the heavy or the dark anyway. And without experiencing
the bad, how can we ever fully appreciate the good?

The Key Type Seven Traits
Self-Referencing

In the Enneagram system of personality types, the focus of each character’s
style can be self-referencing or other-referencing, or both. This distinction
means that each personality has a focus of attention aimed at either what is
going on inside their own self, what is going on with other people, or both.
In the case of Type Seven, the focus of attention is the Seven’s own inner
experience—their thoughts, preferences, desires, needs, and feelings. This
pattern of attentional focus has the description “self-referencing” because
the contents of the Seven’s inner world is their primary focus. This habit

makes Sevens tune in primarily to what they want, need, and do in an
immediate way. Like any other essentially neutral trait, this tendency can be
a good thing: for instance, Sevens tend to know what they want and need,
which makes it much easier for them to get it. And as with anything else,
this self-focus can also present problems, especially in relationships, when
Sevens prioritize what they want to the extent that they fail to perceive and
respond to the needs of others.
Positive Reframing/Optimism

Sevens excel at positively reframing situations that might be perceived in
less-than-positive terms. Habitually oriented to keeping their mood upbeat,
and automatically attentive to “the bright side,” they are relentlessly
optimistic; they easily reframe negatives into positives without much
conscious effort.
Reframing comes naturally to Sevens, given their tendency to idealize
their experience of the world. Framing things in positive terms goes hand in
hand with the tendency to amplify positive data and minimize the negative,
a strategy that allows Sevens to see things and people as better than they
really are.
Like most elements of characterological coping strategies, reframing has
its “positive” uses. It can be a highly effective way of maintaining a
perspective that motivates people, for example, especially when external
conditions make it hard to keep morale up. And it can also highlight
important truths about what is good in a situation that some might initially
view as negative.
But, like most habitual patterns, reframing can also be taken too far—
especially by Sevens, who reframe reality to defend against seeing
something real and important that they might label as “negative” because it
gives them bad feelings. Positive reframing can cause Sevens to suspend
criticality just when a critical eye is most needed. It can be a way of making
everything all right and denying a real need to cope with something
difficult. And it can eliminate “negative” data that may be vital to a deeper
understanding of what is going on and what can or should be done to ensure
a positive outcome.
Finally, the optimism and idealization common to Type Sevens can lead
them to confuse imagination with reality. They so naturally and
automatically see whatever is occurring through the positive vision of their

imaginations that they can misread or ignore important elements of events
or people that don’t fit into that positive picture. Because looking on the
bright side is socially acceptable—and it seems like common sense to many
people—it is important for Sevens to see how this seemingly benign (or
worthwhile) activity can also be taken too far in the context of the human
ego. Since personality patterns are, by definition, unconscious, Sevens may
not see the problems inherent in continually reframing what is happening in
positive terms.
Hedonism

In the Seven’s focus on hedonism, the goal of a pleasure-filled life
rationalizes the avoidance of suffering. If one of your central values is that
seeking pleasure in itself is an important and desirable goal, you can avoid
questioning the deeper motivations that drive the “gluttonous pleasure
bias.”18
When hedonism becomes normalized, you have a ready rationale for the
ongoing movement away from pain and into pleasure. And to the extent that
Sevens’ pleasure-seeking activities distract them from important emotions
they don’t want to feel, hedonism becomes a valid end in itself, justifying
all manner of inspired avoidance practices. In this way, Sevens create a
philosophy about the value of living for pleasure that supports their illusion
that they can banish suffering and still manage to lead a full and fulfilling
life.
In fully accepting the hedonistic attitude, Sevens may also habitually
confuse pleasure with love, as Sevens typically came to feel loved through
the experience of pleasure and indulgence in childhood.19 As a result,
Sevens regularly engage in self-indulgent experiences that they
(unconsciously) take for love. Perpetuating this false equality between real
love, which necessarily involves an active willingness to experience a
whole range of feelings and not just the happy ones, and pleasure invites
Sevens to believe that the hedonistic mode of living can supply an
experience close to love—which it can’t. In this way, fixated Sevens can
believe they are having deep experiences of love when in reality they are
just skimming along the hedonistic surface of what is possible in a
relationship.
Rebelliousness

Given that Sevens want to do what they want to do when they want to do it
—that they don’t want to have limits imposed on them by other people—it
follows that, like their fellow head-based types, they are essentially antiauthoritarian. However, because they dislike open conflict and the
associated unpleasant feelings it may stir up, Sevens display more covert
forms of rebelliousness. Naranjo describes them as having an “anticonventional orientation”20 rather than an “anti-authoritarian” stance, as
they adopt an attitude toward authority that is a form of “implicit rebellion,”
which manifests through their “keen eye for conventional prejudices” and
often finds a “humorous outlet.”21 Their rebelliousness is thus “not
confrontive or direct, but sly.”22
Being anti-conventional allows you to question authority implicitly
without feeling compelled to openly oppose it. Sevens would rather charm
their way around a limiting authority figure through humor, intellectual
manipulation, and seeming acquiescence than pick a fight that might lead to
unpleasantness. An anti-conventional viewpoint also allows Sevens to
question typical ways of doing things without having to abandon
conventional behavior completely. Open opposition has the possible
negative side effect of attracting more potentially limiting authoritarian
attention, something that the morally flexible Seven excels at avoiding. As
Naranjo points out, this makes Sevens the ideological forces behind
revolutions rather than the activists.23
Generally, Sevens are kind and friendly people who “do not pay very
much attention to authority and…implicitly assume authority to be bad.”24
Type Seven individuals are not so much engaged in an obvious struggle
against authority, like Type Sixes or Type Eights, “they simply do not heed
it.”25 They want to be free to indulge themselves—something that is often
not possible in daily life when we are subject to the potentially inhibiting
influences of parents, spouses, bosses, or subordinates—so they live in what
Naranjo calls a “non-hierarchical psychological environment.”26 Sensitive
to being constrained by outside authority, Sevens adopt an attitude that is
“diplomatic rather than oppositional.”27
Seven individuals don’t take authority too seriously; they have
confidence in their own ability to make potential tyrants into friends, so
authority figures don’t infringe excessively on Sevens’ ability to indulge
themselves. Similarly, Sevens find being the authority uncomfortable,

preferring instead to exert influence through mental creativity and
comradeship, “while at the same time assuming the garb of modesty.”28
They allow themselves and others a great deal of freedom; “their motto is
‘live and let live.’”29
Lack of Focus/Discipline

The Type Seven tendency to avoid limits also leads to difficulty in
maintaining focus and self-discipline. Sevens’ ability to shift their mental
focus very rapidly leads to a heightened ability for creative thinking, but it
also means they have a difficult time focusing on one thing at a time.
Sevens tend to be permissive with themselves and also highly distractable
—both by internal and external stimuli. As a result, Sevens
characteristically find it hard to focus on something for the full amount of
time it takes to work from start to finish on something mundane.
Sevens view the world through an idealized lens instead of seeing it as
the often limiting and frustrating place it is. This fantasizing about the
future and intolerance for frustration and boredom in the present is a recipe
for distraction. Besides, Sevens do not like to postpone pleasure. If there is
something fun to do now, it can be easy for them to find a way to rationalize
putting off a (less obviously enjoyable) work task in favor of doing
something pleasurable.

The Type Seven Shadow
Sevens have blind spots related to the pain and discomforts inherent in life,
and especially the potential value of feeling painful emotions. In many ways,
Sevens’ Shadow is the archetypal Shadow: they focus on the light and don’t
want to see the shadow of darkness that it casts. Their personality’s
perspective represents the reluctance many of us feel about facing the
darker aspects of our experience and the desire most of us have to avoid
feeling painful or frightening emotions. Sevens model the basic human
impulse to retreat from pain and other bad feelings—a reaction that forms
the basis of all our psychological defenses.
Many Sevens report a fear of getting stuck in fear or depression or other
painful feelings; they express a belief that if they allow themselves to open
up to feeling their deeper pain, they will become trapped in it forever. This
underlying, sometimes unconscious, fear keeps the potential value of the
conscious experience of pain—especially in the service of personal growth

—in the Shadow, and it motivates the Seven’s focus on pleasure, options,
visions of the future, and freedom. Their conscious focus on pleasure helps
them avoid unpleasant experiences; their conscious need for many options
allows them to have potential exit pathways through which they can
maneuver around uncomfortable situations; their attention on future
possibilities helps them get away from difficult feelings in the present; and
their preoccupation with freedom assures them that they won’t be forced to
stay in a particular painful reality.
Most of all, fear and anxiety themselves remain blind spots for Sevens,
even though those emotions might drive many of their behaviors. Although
Sevens belong to the “fear triad” of Enneagram types, they often report not
feeling afraid (though more self-aware Sevens may sometimes be conscious
of a vague or underlying sense of anxiety). When fear is kept in the Seven’s
shadow, it gets acted out in the search for mental stimulation, fun things to
do and think about, and future adventures. In these ways, Sevens habitually
avoid having regular contact with their pain—and, by extension, their
emotional depths.
Related to the fear of fear, Sevens have a strong aversion to boredom—
but this often expresses a resistance to becoming aware of experiences, like
emptiness and discomfort, that Sevens relegate to their Shadow. Sevens are
known for keeping up a fast pace in life. They tend to be fast talkers and
quick thinkers. They like to keep moving, and this can reflect a desire to
avoid whatever they might label as “boring.” But behind their desire to not
be bored is a potentially unconscious fear of having to slow down or sit still
in the experience of stillness, which might cause uncomfortable feelings to
arise.
While Sevens put their conscious focus on levity, fun, and happiness,
they may also be sensitive to to not being taken seriously by others. Their
need to be “light” can make it seem to other people that they are
“lightweight,” creating a situation in which they want to be seen as
substantive and engaged but people perceive them as superficial or
noncommittal. This perception in turn can make Sevens deny their own
capacity for seriousness, or cause them to remain blind to their actual
resilience in the face of discomfort. Their gluttony for positive experience
and pleasure thus often hides a fear of what they might have to feel if they
did not fill themselves up completely with what feels good.

The Shadow of the Type Seven Passion:
Gluttony in Dante’s Underworld
The passion of gluttony, like lust, is a sin of indulgence. The
gluttonous Shadow of Type Seven habitually subjects reason to
this comfort-loving, thrill-seeking, pleasure-chasing appetite. In
the Inferno, gluttony leads earthly souls to a diametrically
opposite punishment based on an experience of complete
deprivation:
We walked across this marsh of shades beaten down by the
heavy rain, our feet pressing on their emptiness that looked
like human form. Each sinner there was stretched out on the
ground, except for one who quickly sat up straight the
moment that he saw us pass him by…I said: “The pain you
suffer here perhaps disfigures you beyond all recognition: I
can’t remember seeing you before. But tell me who you are,
assigned to grieve in this sad place, afflicted by such torture
that—worse well there may be, but none more foul.”30
Dante’s images show the arrogance and excess of the gluttonous
appetite for pleasure being punished in the perpetual discomfort
of filthy muck. Pressed together like paving stones, howling with
hunger, the Gluttons’ only excess now is the stinking slime
coating them, and they suffer extreme discomfort under a constant
storm of filthy rain and hail.31 As Dante the Pilgrim observes,
other passionate fixations might have more painful consequences,
but none could be more humiliating than the miseries inflicted
upon unrestrained appetite. Thus Dante symbolically
communicates the dark side of gluttony: when your unconscious
gluttony for pleasure runs amok, it inevitably leads to discomfort.
The appetites of the lower self (personality) are insatiable, and we
only become fulfilled when we can leave behind our passionate
excess and ascend to a higher state of being.

The Three Kinds of Sevens:
The Type Seven Subtypes
THE THREE SEVENS EACH REPRESENT a different way of expressing or
responding to the passion of gluttony. The Self-Preservation Seven finds

security through a gluttonous search for pleasure, satisfying opportunities,
and cultivating a network of allies. The Social Seven expresses a kind of
anti-gluttony by being of service to others. The Sexual Seven channels
gluttony into an idealistic search for the ultimate relationship and the best
imaginable experiences.
The three subtypes of Seven therefore represent three different
manifestations of gluttony, each one depending on the dominant instinctual
drive. When the drive for self-preservation dominates, we see a Seven
character whose gluttony motivates him to find security and opportunities
for well-being in a close network of family members, friends, and
associates. When the social instinct is prominent, we see a Social Seven
who goes against gluttony by sacrificing his own needs for the good of
others. And when the drive for sexual or one-to-one connection dominates,
the Seven character is expressed through an exceedingly enthusiastic
personality whose gluttony for pleasurable experiences creates a tendency
to view reality in an extremely positive way.

The Self-Preservation Seven: “Keeper of the Castle”
Self-Preservation Sevens express gluttony through the formation of
alliances. They typically collect around them a kind of family network, in
the sense of banding together with trusted others and creating a good
“mafia” or partisan group through which they can get their needs met. They
rely mostly on those they trust. These Sevens create a kind of surrogate
family of people they value—a family in which they typically occupy a
privileged position.
These Sevens are very practical, good at networking, and skilled at
getting what they want and finding a good deal; they tend to be
opportunistic, self-interested, pragmatic, calculating, and clever. They
readily recognize opportunities for creating an advantage for themselves. In
this way, Naranjo explains, gluttony expresses itself in the Self-Preservation
Seven in an excessive concern with making a good deal at every
opportunity.
Self-Preservation Sevens always have their nose to the wind for good
opportunities. They find ways to get what they need and want, and they
have an easy way of finding pathways to making things happen for
themselves—whether it’s finding the right people, the most advantageous

connections, or a fortuitous career opportunity. They have their ears to the
ground and are socially adept.
These Sevens make business connections and network easily because
they are alert and mindful to the opportunities that come along that can
support their survival. They hold the position that if you are not alert to
opportunities, you will lose out. This Self-Preservation theme is expressed
well in the proverb “The alligator that sleeps becomes a bag.” There’s an
element of self-interest in the alliances the Self-Preservation Seven makes
that may or may not be denied by (or unconscious in) someone with this
subtype. Naranjo says there is a kind of reciprocal interest in these
relationships, expressed in the idea that “I will serve thee, and thou will
serve me.” On the low side of this kind of arrangement, an element of
corruption can be present.
Stylistically, Self-Preservation Sevens are cheerful and amiable, with
traits that resemble a hedonistic, “playboy” or “playgirl” type. They tend to
be warm, friendly, and talkative. (They love to talk.) They can express a
kind of greed and impatience that reflects their desire to consume as many
pleasurable experiences as possible; they want to eat everything. They
expend a lot of energy on controlling everything, handling things without
being noticed. And most of the time, they get away with getting what they
want.
The dominant traits of the Self-Preservation Seven subtype stand out as a
love of pleasure and a self-interested focus on getting what they need to feel
secure. In seeking security, however, they can often confuse desires with
needs. These are people who usually feel a need to have a lot of resources,
including money and other supplies that support survival, and they may
panic if they feel a sense of scarcity.
According to Naranjo, the three main fixations of the Self-Preservation
Sevens are strategy, rebellion, and isolation, though it may be hard to see
these characters as isolated because they tend to be very popular. But their
strategic and mental nature, together with the prominence of their selfinterest, can isolate them from others at a deeper level.
Self-Preservation Sevens cultivate a sense of being kind and generous—
they like to feel that everyone depends on them. They may feel omnipotent
and they may sometimes use people. They may also feel that normal rules
don’t apply to them—that for them, there is no law, and they can do what
they please. This kind of assertion of their freedom and their ability to do

whatever they need to do to support their self-interest helps them feel safer
in the world.
Self-Preservation Sevens’ desire for pleasure and hedonistic selfindulgence can sometimes be seen as a kind of retroactive compulsion to
return to the womb—they dedicate their lives to the pursuit of a kind of
primordial or utopian paradise state of perfect pleasure. In pursuing positive
and stimulating experiences, they may use sex, food, and drink as an escape
from the more difficult parts of life.
The Self-Preservation Seven and the Sexual Seven should be easy to tell
apart, as they represent two opposite ends of a continuum, from pragmatic
and materialistic (Self-Preservation) to idealistic and ethereal (Sexual). The
Self-Preservation subtype is more earthy and sensuous—more gluttonous in
the literal sense of the word—while the Sexual Seven is more “heavenly”
and enthusiastic, more “upward-looking” in terms of both positivity and
high ideals. While both of these two characters focus on distinct kinds of
excess, the Self-Preservation Seven is the most sly, cunning, and pragmatic
personality among the Sevens, while the Sexual Seven is more of a lighthearted enjoyer.
In contrast to the Sexual Seven, the Self-Preservation Seven is not so
much idealistic as they are cynically distrustful. They’re not gullible people
who are easily hypnotized (as the Sexual Seven is); they are more practical
and concrete. The Self-Preservation Seven is the most astute and strategic
character of the three Seven subtypes. They may display elements of Type
Six in that they can at times be fearful or even paranoid, though this is not
their regular mode. And perhaps paradoxically, the Self-Preservation Seven
is more actively flirty, seductive, and sexual than the Sexual Seven, who
often focuses more on an imagined, idealized kind of communion than
actual sex. While the Self-Preservation Seven character resembles a
“playboy” or “playgirl” type of person—an enjoyer of food and sex—the
Sexual Seven can be content with the perfume of things.
Self-Preservation Sevens may experience less difficulty than other
Sevens with making commitments. For instance, many Self-Preservation
Sevens report that they have been married for many years or that they have
had a solid relationship with a partner for a long period of time. When they
participate in groups, however, it may be so they can feel a sense of having
access to resources if they need something at some point. Often, having
close relationships is something they view as an investment, like putting

money in the bank—you always have someone you can call on if you need
some specific kind of help. For that reason they tend to be very active in the
groups they join and the networks they are affiliated with.
Naranjo explains that spiritual aspiration is not so common in SelfPreservation Sevens; they often reject religion and tend not to believe in
anything. They’re more practical, more materialistic, and more rebellious
than the other two Seven subtypes. They’re very cheerful and friendly, but
also disconnected from their emotions. They are sensuous, earthly, worldly
characters who can be very entertaining and who display a light-hearted
lack of seriousness—though when it comes to finding security through
making money and establishing a network of associates, they display keen
self-interest.
When Self-Preservation Sevens have the Sexual instinct as their second
most dominant instinct, they can look more like Sixes (more isolated,
overly careful, and strategic), and when they have the Social instinct in
second place, they may look more like magnanimous Eights (peopleoriented and impulsive). However, unlike Sixes, they tend to be relentlessly
positive and to find security through pursuing their self-interest; and in
contrast to Eights, they tend to be motivated by a survival fear or anxiety
deeper down, even if they aren’t always aware of it.
Joe, a Self-Preservation Seven, speaks:
There is a gluttonous element in me that I believe stems from an
early understanding in childhood that life is inherently
evanescent. Opportunities missed are not easily regained. In that
light, as I approached my graduation from middle school and
prepared to go to high school, I realized that it was time to weigh
my priorities and start planning for a career and a life maximally
lived. So, at thirteen years old, I prioritized: 1) living and
enjoying life to the fullest while it was possible; 2) helping others
do the same; 3.) not hurting others along the way. That was in
eighth grade.
The road to medical school and beyond involved painful
sacrifices in regards to quality of life. I endured a decade of
deferred pleasure and buried myself in my studies by making the
most of my intellectual interest in medicine and the awesome

experience of becoming a surgeon. What got me through the hard
work was the clear vision I had of a complete life: weighing the
short-term missed experiences against the long-term pleasures
and security over the span of a full life as a plastic surgeon
helped me see that the hardships involved in becoming a doctor
were worth it. To keep things balanced, I played hard during my
brief breaks from work and tried not to miss a minute of fun with
friends on weekends or nights off.
While the sacrifices involved in becoming a surgeon weren’t easy,
I now find myself in the most wondrous position of having fulfilled
my “mission statement”—I’ve done the most good with the least
harm while reaping additional quality-of-life benefits. I love my
artist wife beyond words. We sail and grow organic vegetables
together. I enjoy the challenges of growing grapes and making
wine, and we are creating an aesthetically beautiful and selfsustaining homestead. I relish the rewards of time at work and
even more at play. What could be better than or wrong with that?
I am aware, however, that I am less in touch with my emotions
than might be ideal, as experiencing life more intensely on many
different levels makes sense to me. I enjoy the experience when
love, empathy, and other emotions well up into my consciousness,
but I usually function quite happily on a more cerebral plane.
Other times, fear or anxiety may enter the room, but I am less
eager to tolerate their presence. I have learned to listen to my
intuition and emotions, but unless they present an actionable
warning, I prefer not to dwell on negative moods.

The Social Seven: “Sacrifice” (Countertype)
Social Sevens represents a kind of a pure character that, as the countertype
of the Type Seven subtypes, expresses a kind of “counter-gluttony.” Social
Sevens go against the Seven passion of gluttony in that they consciously
avoid exploiting others. Naranjo says it’s as if they can sense the tendency
within themselves toward gluttony and decide to instead define themselves
as anti-gluttonous.
If gluttony is a wish for more, a wish for taking advantage of all you can
get from a situation, there is a hint of exploitation in gluttony. But as the

countertype, the Social subtype wants to be good and pure and not act on
their gluttonous impulse. This is a person who wants to avoid being
excessive or excessively opportunistic, and who works against any
unconscious tendency they may have to exploit others.
Gluttony may thus be difficult to recognize in Social Sevens because they
strive to hide it in altruistic behavior. This purifies them of the guilt of
feeling an attraction toward pleasure or toward acting in their own selfinterest in ways that cause them to take advantage of others.
Social Sevens avoid focusing on their own self-interest or advantage by
pursuing an ideal of themselves and the world. They sacrifice their gluttony
to become a better person and to work for a better world in which there is
no pain or conflict. As Naranjo explains, they defer their own desires in
pursuit of an ideal.
In their efforts to work against gluttony, Social Sevens can actually be
too pure. Their efforts to attain purity can extend to worrying about their
diet, their health, and their spirit. Interestingly, Naranjo notes, these Sevens
are often vegans.
In striving for purity and anti-gluttony, they express a kind of ascetic (or
Five-ish) ideal. They make a virtue of getting by on less for themselves. In
trying to prove their goodness, they typically give others more, and take
less for themselves, as a way of going against their gluttonous desire for
more. Even though they might want the biggest piece of cake, they go
against that impulse and take the smallest one instead, leaving the larger
portions for others.
Social Sevens take on a lot of responsibility in the group or the family. In
doing this, they express a sacrifice of gluttony for the benefit of others.
They postpone their own desires in order to enact an ideal of service. As the
name of this subtype suggests, “Sacrifice” means a willingness to be of
service.
But where is the ego reward in this seemingly pure, unselfish personality
strategy? Part of the ego strategy of this subtype is that they want—crave—
to be seen as good for their sacrifice. They have a hidden gluttony for the
acknowledgment of their sacrifice—are hungry for love and recognition—
and this hunger can be insatiable. These Sevens use their sacrifice to cover
up defects and shortcomings and to invite recognition and admiration or
love, because they don’t feel right legitimizing and acting on their desires

and whims. Their sacrifice and service is the price they pay for their
neurotic need for admiration.
In addition to inspiring appreciation and recognition in others, Social
Sevens want to have a good image, to reduce conflicts, and to create debts
in others. However, these motivations can lead these Sevens to enter into
relationships that are relatively superficial.
In line with their need for recognition of their sacrifices, there is a
tendency in this Social subtype to adopt the role of helper, to be of service,
and to be concerned with the alleviation of pain. But while they are drawn
to alleviate others’ pain, they don’t like to feel it themselves, and so helping
others may also be a way for them to project their pain somewhere outside
themselves and try to relieve it at a safe distance. They are always “being”
for the other. This is an indulgent and generous character capable of
managing projects and mobilizing energies for a particular purpose. They
tend to deliver the services they provide with a lot of dedication.
Social Sevens experience an inner taboo on selfishness and want to be
seen as the “good child” or the “good person.” They experience repressed
guilt for hiding their self-interest in the guise of good, and they may project
their disowned guilt for their unacknowledged gluttony onto others, then
judge them for not being committed or dedicated enough. These Sevens
may also distrust themselves because they know they mix up altruism and
self-interest; they may judge their own deeper motivations as “bad” or
“self-interested.”
Social Sevens are very idealistic, but their idealism is a mix of illusion,
good intentions, and ingenuity that function together as an “intellectual
drug” that motivates action. They’re very active, moved in an ongoing way
by the ideals they want to translate into life to improve the world, but they
need their idealism to help them to activate—they invest a lot in altruism,
idealism, dedication, and sacrifice to make them feel more acceptable. They
also tend to use the defense of rationalization to support the things they do
in the name of altruism and idealism. Their idealism is in part based on
rationalizing ideologies so that if any of their beliefs are proved wrong, they
can simply replace it with another rationale and then explain this change as
evolution. Given this, they may have an underlying sense of panic about
losing their idealism, as they fear that would ultimately lead to apathy and
emptiness.

Social Sevens’ focus on motivating themselves through idealism can take
the form of a feeling of being on a mission—they may want to be “The
Savior.” They may at times criticize themselves for being naive and
unrealistic, for wanting too much of mankind—and the Social Seven does
have some youthful or adolescent qualities: they are provocative,
enlightened, can be simplistic, and can get lazy when the task becomes too
demanding. And in addition to this, they may not be conscious of their own
laziness, love of comfort, and narcissism.
Naranjo explains that enthusiasm, idealism, and social skills are the three
pillars of the Social Seven personality. These Sevens are also visionaries:
they imagine a better, freer, healthier, more peaceful world. (New Age
culture is a Social Seven culture.) They often express excessive enthusiasm
about their visions and may have fantasies of a perfect future. They have a
tendency to manipulate through enthusiasm. On the surface, they appear
very joyful, and they avoid dissonance and conflict.
In relationships, Social Sevens may feel challenged when they get caught
between their strong desire not to cause another person pain and their fear
of commitment. In keeping with their desire to be pure and maintain their
idealistic stance, they look for a kind of romantic love that is pure and
perfect. They unconsciously put themselves in an arrogant position of being
“better” or more pure than their partners and then expecting them to evolve
toward perfection. They may also have difficulty navigating the deeper
emotions that get stirred up by intimate relationships.
Because of their enthusiasm and joyfulness, as well as their prominent
desire to help and be of service, Social Sevens can look like Twos—but
while Twos focus primarily on others and don’t have as much of a
connection with their own selves, Social Sevens are still primarily selfreferencing, not other-referencing, so they will usually know what they
need, even if they decide to sacrifice it. Their desire to help is born of the
need to go against a sense of self-interest, not just a desire for approval, so
they have a more direct experience of their own needs and wants despite
their tendency to make efforts to serve others or a higher good. These are
people who are very pure—and in this way they can also look One-ish—but
theirs is a goodness for applause, a desire to reach an ideal of perfection or
purity that’s based on social consensus (as opposed to Ones’ internally
generated sense of what is “right”).

Rusty, a Social Seven, speaks:
The easiest thing to forget about Sevens is that fear drives us and
safety is what all the options are for. We are practiced at not
showing our desperation on the surface. As a Social Seven,
“Sacrifice” plays out without too much trouble for me, because in
the vast array of possibilities, any treasure is expendable as long
as there is some other nugget to gloat over. This goes for any
cause or endeavor, no matter what the seemingly altruistic reason
or the secret self-reward.
Idealism and the desire to be seen as a good person rather than a
greedy person has led me to join a long series of philanthropic
groups. I love the feeling of safety and certainty I get in groups,
even though I generally join groups in which I don’t exactly
belong. No matter how committed I was to breathing life into the
touring theater company, in the final analysis it was the fact of
hating to perform soliloquies that allowed me to leave that safe
haven for something else. While we Social Sevens can look like
Twos, my deep impulse to stop nodding and agreeing (along with
not having a truly deep need-anchor of my own) is what has
allowed me to leave just about as many groups as I have joined,
no matter how devastating the wreckage left behind. Or how still
the pond without a ripple.
Grappling to own the Four-ish/Seven-ish fact of narcissism, I
balked until it clicked that seeing too much of both goodness,
virtue, and beauty and wickedness, evil, and inadequacy in my
reflection ultimately leads down the same rabbit hole of
overexamining myself. So, in many efforts to get outside myself,
for my own good, serially joining and leaving has put me on
many peaks and in many corners. With myriad projects, plans,
and escape hatches comes that ability to illuminate and stitch
together odd similarities and unique insights, always from way
out of left field: for instance, I have been the only person at the
logging camp carrying a dulcimer, the guy fresh from Wyoming
managing an A&D showroom on Madison Avenue in NYC, the
Quaker in a Presbyterian church choir, the token straight man in
a gay men’s chorus, and so on. I like to sneak in the side door, stir

things up, make contributions large or small, grab several magpie
points for virtue, and then I’ve gotta go.

The Sexual Seven: “Suggestibility”
Individuals with the Sexual Seven subtype are gluttons for things of the
higher world—for optimistically seeing things as they could be in the ideal
world of their imaginations. Sexual Sevens are dreamers with a need to
imagine something better than stark, ordinary reality. These Sevens have a
passion for embellishing everyday reality, for being too enthusiastic, and for
idealizing things and seeing the world as better than it actually is. Their
gluttony gets expressed as a need for idealization.
Sexual Sevens are not as interested in the things of this world as they are
in the things of a more highly advanced dimension. They look at the sky as
an escape from the earth; they are more “heavenly” than “earthy.” People
with this subtype are light-hearted enjoyers with a need to dream and to
idealize and embellish the ordinary. In line with this tendency, they can be
very idealistic and somewhat naive.
These Sevens tend to look at things with the optimism of somebody who
is in love. Everything looks better when you are in love, and the Sexual
Seven takes refuge in this kind of ideal, positive experience as a way of
unconsciously avoiding what might be unpleasant in life. They focus on a
highly positive view of life to distract themselves from the uncomfortable
or scary emotions they would rather remain unaware of.
It is said that “love is blind.” Naranjo contends that Sexual Sevens may
be said to be blind in this same sense: they display a bit too much
enthusiasm and optimism and pay disproportionate attention to the positive
data in a situation. These Sevens can fall in love very intensely, and they
relate to their world through dreaming and imagination. They imagine what
the world could be, and they can believe that this optimistic view is real.
In this way, Sexual Sevens express a need to fantasize, a need to dream,
or a need for rose-colored glasses. These Sevens have a tendency to be too
happy. They display a need to live in a charmed reality, to fantasize—to live
in a world they create in their minds rather than the actual external world.
This can be seen as an overcompensation that reflects an unconscious desire
to deny or avoid the painful or boring or frightening parts of life. Sexual
Sevens tend to experience an underlying fear of getting stuck in these kinds
of feelings and so take refuge in optimism.

This Seven’s need to dream is a form of idealization—a passion for
viewing life as it could be or as they imagine it to be; a tendency to live for
the sweetness in a dreamed-of or imagined world rather than for the
ordinary and not-so-interesting reality. They don’t want to pay attention to
anything bad or difficult that might be happening.
Sexual Sevens think, “I’m okay, everything’s okay.” Naranjo points out
that this way of thinking is very therapeutic for everyone who is not a Seven.
Sexual Sevens often had some sort of painful experience growing up and
they’ve adopted a sense of lightness as a defense against feeling their pain.
They defensively take refuge in a happy, or excessively happy, and
expansive mood that operates as a way of unconsciously diverting
themselves from recognizing and feeling a deeper pain. It’s like walking
lightly above things or hovering at an elevated level as a means of escaping
the uncomfortable emotions.
The name given to this type is “Suggestibility,” which implies a readiness
to be mentally flexible and imaginative—but it also has to do with being
gullible, easy to hypnotize, and susceptible to the infection of enthusiasm.
Naranjo points out that Sexual Sevens’ cognitive defenses are shaped as
suggestion, fantasy, and illusion. They can naively believe that people are
what they say they are, and they can be very trusting, seeing the world and
people in beautiful, perhaps overly positive, terms. They run to an idyllic
future and away from a potentially uncomfortable or painful present. They
display a prevalence of thought and imagination over feeling and instinct.
In terms of personal style, Sexual Sevens are people who like to talk a
lot. They are verbose and excited by their own discourse, and their speech is
characterized by a flow of “wonderful ideas and possibilities.” They can
also play the role of the carefree clown whom nothing seems to affect.
People with this subtype tend to use ironic humor, which can be escapist,
and they test limits through seduction and humor. They seek acceptance,
appreciation, and recognition, and they manipulate through seduction.
Sexual Sevens plan and improvise a lot. They believe that they can do
everything, and they feel a need to plan or mount successful strategies that
will ensure their pleasure. They may experience anxiety, however, about the
difficulty of engaging in many scenarios at once and having to give
something up. They can have a restless and anxious energy, which can take
the outer form of doing things on many fronts and engaging in many
activities at the same time. Their excitement and anxiety can cloud their

perception of reality. At times they may rebel through passive-aggression,
which they tend to do by living in their imagination—relating to situations
as they would like them to be and not taking action in the real world.
Sexual Sevens see the world as a marketplace of outstanding
opportunities: the more you take, the more you can enjoy. These Sevens
express excitement about the possibility of consuming many experiences—
everything is exciting and spectacular—like someone who goes to a bakery
and wants to try a bit of everything. They find a sense of satisfaction in
being able to have it all, in not missing or losing out on anything.
Contrary to what we might expect from this “Sexual” Seven subtype, this
Seven is not so much focused on sex as they are on the essence of love.
Sexual Sevens fall in love very easily, but they’re not as interested in
having sex with someone as they are in attaining a kind of idealized
ultimate connection. Sexuality itself stays primarily in the head for these
characters. It’s a normal sexuality on one hand, but it’s a promise for a
bigger opening to a mystical union on the other.
Sexual Sevens are gluttons for things of the higher world, and this makes
them dreamers. They often feel an attraction to spiritual or metaphysical
experience, as well as to extraordinary or esoteric things. Earthly, mundane
things can be very hard to bear for a person who lives in a more idealized
mental reality, and so this individual can have an intense dislike for
activities they find routine, tedious, or boring.
For the Sexual Seven, earthly things take effort, and can therefore feel
boring or tedious, whereas the mind works so easily and without friction.
It’s so much easier to imagine doing something than to actually do it. So,
this Seven finds comfort—indulging a kind of worldly laziness—in
imagining instead of doing.
Adam, a Sexual Seven, speaks:
I deeply resonate with the description of the Sexual Seven. While I
have never been a glutton for things or substances, I have been a
glutton for idealization, learning, and good energy. In order to
feel okay, I have generally needed to feel positively “stoked.” In
fact, my nickname in high school was “EnthusiAdam.” I was very
excited about most facets of my life, and my enthusiasm was

contagious. This characterization of me has remained fairly
constant, although I have mellowed somewhat as I’ve aged.
I have also thought of myself as a serious romantic, and much of
my thinking is consistent with an enneatype of Four: I love
deeply, I love being in love, and I have always longed for love. As
such, I was very careful about who I chose as my wife. I needed to
be unequivocal about this important decision—and, thankfully, I
chose well. I have been madly in love with her for the now morethan-eleven years we’ve been together. What is now a reality was
previously a dream that I spent much time visualizing and
fantasizing about, and I’m now aware that these activities are
consistent with this subtype.
I have a strong dislike for the mundane. I find mindless chatter
difficult to bear, and I really, really can’t stand housework. The
only way I can do housework is by distracting myself with an
MP3 of a stimulating lecture and being left alone while I do my
chores. Then, at least, I’m learning—the time is not a total waste
and my gluttony for learning is satisfied.
Lastly, I have spent a great deal of time fantasizing about my
ideal retirement. For me, that retirement would involve traveling
with my beloved wife, plenty of intellectual stimulation, endless
fun, and tons of time for deep connection with her.

“The Work” for Type Seven:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS SEVENS WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of pursuing more superficial pleasures and
avoiding the enjoyment of a deeper experience of themselves. They do this
by slowing down and allowing themselves to be present, appreciating the
value of their fear and their pain, and finding the joy in personal
connections that comes when they connect with their own depths.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Sevens, this means observing the ways they avoid the

deeper parts of themselves (and life) to stay comfortable; exploring the
ways they lose contact with themselves when they defend against pain and
seek out pleasure; and making active efforts to reconnect with themselves
and reengage with life on a deeper and more immediate level. It is
particularly important for them to learn to endure the pain involved in inner
work with the understanding that true joy, contentment, and aliveness come
from facing what we tend to run away from and integrating what scares us.
In this section I offer some ideas of what Sevens can notice, explore, and
aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their personality
and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Sevens take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Focusing on pleasure as a way to escape pain

Observe what happens when you speed up and head toward an experience
that promises to be pleasurable. Try to get clearer about your motives when
you feel driven toward a particular experience of pleasure. Ask yourself if
you might be moving toward fun as a way of avoiding the threat of feeling
something uncomfortable, and what, exactly, you might be trying to get
away from. Notice if you change the subject during a conversation to avoid
an unpleasant topic. Tune in to the ways you may flee when a painful
feeling threatens to arise. Observe what is happening when your enthusiasm
rises or the pace of your activity or planning increases. What are you
moving toward? What might you be running away from? Think about what
is motivating you when your search for fun intensifies or you distract
yourself with stimulating ideas while trying to focus on something less
interesting. Inquire into your feelings if something objectively painful
happens, and notice what you do in response. Notice the way you devalue
specific experiences by framing them negatively, thereby justifying (or
rationalizing) the act of avoiding them.
Confusing indulgence and freedom from limits with love

Observe what happens when you engage in “soft rebellion.” Note how you
experience the “authorities” in your life, even if this includes your partner
or a friend who has expectations of you. Notice how you deal with options
and how you respond to constraints others place on you. What kinds of
things do you feel limited by? How do you react to these perceived or
actual limitations? Try to tune into any fear or anxiety connected to your
experience of feeling constrained by others. Notice any fears related to
being trapped in discomfort, and think about what that might be about.
What do you imagine that fuels your fear of limits? Observe the ways in
which you might indulge in pleasure when what you really want is love.
Notice the ways in which you indulge yourself as a way of finding comfort.
Note if you equate limitation with a lack of love and indulgence with love
and think about why. Tune in to what is happening inside you if some sort
of painful experience seems to intensify your quest for pleasure. Think
about what you really want from the people you are closest to, and note if
you push them toward engaging in fun with you when what you really want
is love or attention.
Living for or in the future as a way of avoiding being present now

Observe what is happening when you are focused on the future. Inquire into
your deeper motivations if you feel a compulsion to plan for a future
adventure. Notice what your visions of the future look like and how they
might function as a way to escape (or compensate for) what’s happening in
the present. Think about what is going on now when you are focused on what
is going to happen then. Observe any tendency you might have to imagine an
excessively utopian or optimistic future scenario. What motivates you at a
deeper level when you create these positive, futuristic pictures? What,
exactly, is so good about your imagined future? Is there something specific
you are trying to get away from? Try to slow your pace and observe what
happens, especially if any emotions or sensations arise.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Sevens observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns better. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?

How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Sevens can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider, to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns.
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Sevens cope?

In understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how they
operate as coping strategies, Sevens have the opportunity to become more
aware of how and why they avoid deeper and darker experiences and hover
more at the surface of things. If Sevens can tell the story of their early life
and look for ways in which they may have needed to retreat from fear and
pain as a way to cope, they can have compassion for their young self, who
may have developed that strategy in order to stay happy. Exploring the
“how and why” of the development of their habitual patterns can also
provide Sevens with a larger perspective on how their pursuit of happiness
paradoxically prevents them from having a fuller and richer experience of
life. Gaining insight into how their need for levity actually masks important
aspects of experience helps Sevens realize how their personality style helps
them stay comfortable and blocks them from contact with their deepest
inner sources of vitality. Seeing how needing freedom to escape pain
worked as a protection early on enables Sevens to see how they can become
trapped in the limiting “acorn shell” of their personality, even while they
believe they are free.
What painful emotions are the Type Seven patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic
anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. For Sevens, however, their specific “false self” personality
is exactly designed to help them avoid an awareness of their painful
emotions. The Seven personality often develops as a response to not having
enough protection—or the right kind of protection—early in life; it operates

defensively to distract the Seven individual from having to feel difficult
emotions like pain, sadness, fear, anxiety, envy, and inadequacy. The Seven
personality is the prototype of the way all the personalities—to one extent
or another—protect us from bad feelings by helping us focus on and
generate good feelings. And while this is often necessary in childhood, in
order to have healthy relationships and to become all we are meant to be as
adults, we must see how our early defenses against pain have come to
represent obstacles to a fuller expression of who we are.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Seven patterns operate in me now?

Through reflecting on how their patterns operate in the present, the three
kinds of Sevens can begin to have a greater awareness of how they distract
themselves when they feel uncomfortable, or how they make plans with
escape hatches. If they can consciously catch themselves in the act of
avoiding making a commitment, they can wake up to the deeper
motivations that drive them to seek comfort in positive stimulation. It can
be eye-opening for Sevens to see how they deprive themselves of a deeper
sense of their own aliveness and connection to others when they
automatically divert their attention to the pursuit of amusement. By tracking
their habits of mind, they can see how actively remaining stuck in old
patterns prevents them from having an ideal experience of all they can be,
even if those patterns are about promising fun and excitement. Sevens open
a door to a more complete sense of fulfillment when they can see how and
why their personality patterns inhibit them in an ongoing way.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Sevens keep themselves from seeing?

To really increase their self-knowledge, it will be important for Sevens to
remind themselves about what they don’t see when their personality’s
programming is driving the show. Sevens tend to focus on what feels good
and serves their interests. But when they pay attention to their own
priorities as a way of asserting their freedom and staving off limitation, they
may not always pay sufficient attention to what other people need and want.
And while their intentions toward others are often pure and positive, their
reluctance to tune into their own deeper feelings means they unconsciously
avoid empathizing with others. In addition to this, Sevens’ habit of moving
away from the difficult feelings they keep in their Shadow may keep them

trapped in exactly the kinds of painful experiences they try to avoid. When
you don’t see the value in contacting your own pain and discomfort, you
can’t effectively deal with it in ways that can support your growth and
expansion. If you have a blind spot where your sensitivities, your fears, and
your sadness would normally be, how can you forge an effective and
enlivening connection with your depths? When you fail to see your own
deeper feelings—when you can’t allow them to surface because you fear
getting trapped in them—it’s hard to wake up to all of who you are.
Focusing on looking for what you don’t see may help you get out of the
habit of always needing to feel good and allow you to realize your capacity
to feel whole.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The irony of the Seven strategy is that by trying to remain happy all the
time, you limit your ability to grow and to experience the full range of
human emotion. When you are only interested in being happy, you can’t do
the inner work of growing beyond the limited constraints of your (“acorn”)
personality because you don’t have the desire or the fortitude to “go
underground” and allow your shell to break open. As discussed in Chapter
2, for all of us, the path of growth to a higher state of being necessarily
passes through a full engagement with our fear, our pain, and all the
emotions we learn to avoid when we adopt a coping strategy to survive in
the world. When we (consciously or unconsciously) decide we are only
going to experience the positive side of life, we prevent ourselves from
going through the “dark night of the soul” that is a part of any inner journey
of waking up and coming home to the true self. If you can’t face your
darker emotions by feeling them all the way through, receiving the
information they bring about who you are, and letting them go, you can’t
break the acorn shell open to reveal the future oak tree inside.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to think, feel, and act with more choice and
awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Sevens about “what to

do” after they’ve observed the key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns described above in
the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the Enneagram’s Inner Flow
arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to study your passion (or
“Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite, the antidote, the
higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Seven Personality Patterns:
“What To Do” to Address Them
Focusing on pleasure as a way to escape pain
Make yourself more mindful of the movement from pleasure to pain. Only when Sevens

consistently observe how they automatically move away from pain and
toward pleasure, can they see this escape route as the illusion it really is.
The first step to being able to stick with discomfort is to slow down the
process of the flight into pleasure and watch how it happens. The more
Sevens can mindfully watch themselves as they deny, avoid, or otherwise
move away when they get a whiff of pain, the more they open the door to
being able to make the conscious choice to stay with difficult experiences
and learn that they can survive and grow from them.
Don’t mistake a bag of wind for a bag of treasure. Just as Odysseus and his crew got

blown all the way back to Aeolia when the sailors got greedy for the
pleasure that they thought a bag of treasure would bring them, Sevens are in
danger of creating more pain for themselves when they focus so singlemindedly on pleasure.32 Often, the pretty pictures we elaborate in our minds
as imaginative escapes into fabulous possibilities don’t really amount to
anything. Just because you can focus on pleasure and imagine something
greener on the other side of the proverbial fence, doesn’t mean that you
don’t have to experience the pain sometimes involved in real life if you
really want to live. As long as Sevens believe they can avoid dealing with
difficult emotions by immersing themselves in pleasurable experiences,

positive mental pictures, and party plans, they won’t be able to make very
much progress on their inner journey.
Recognize the pleasure of your pain and the pain that comes from living only for pleasure. Fond as

they are of reframing, Sevens can wake up to an important truth when they
realize the pleasure in their pain and the pain of too much pleasure.
Paradoxical as it might seem, allowing yourself to face your fears and touch
into your pain can lead to more pleasure in life and relationships, and too
much of a good thing usually leads to some sort of pain. Regular reminders
to this effect help Sevens reverse the belief that they have to avoid pain
through pleasure to be okay and allow them to engage in the work of
becoming more open to traversing all of their inner terrain.

Confusing indulgence and freedom from limits with love
Recognize anxiety as a side effect of liberation. The philosopher Soren Kierkegaard

famously said that “anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.” Sevens can use
this idea to remind themselves that anxiety is an inherent part of being free,
not something you escape by seeking unlimited freedom. Walking toward
anxiety instead of away from it (and understanding its sources) can help
Sevens to work through it and truly become free of it.
Learn the difference between love and pleasure. Sevens can confuse love and pleasure if

receiving pleasure was one of the only ways they felt loved early on in life.
While Sevens often focus on pleasure as a way to be “happy” in
relationships, real love and relationships require bringing all of yourself to
your experience with others, not just the happy or pleasurable parts. Sevens
can grow by noticing when they are using the pursuit of fun and pleasure as
a substitute for love. Modern psychologists have moved away from “the
pleasure principle,” Freud’s idea that humans are mainly motivated by a
drive toward pleasure. While pleasure is a primary motivation for Sevens,
post-Freudian theorists wisely suggested it’s not pleasure but the quality of
our contact with others that’s primarily important in human fulfillment.
Reference others as a way of balancing freedom and connection. As discussed above,

Sevens primarily “reference,” or pay attention to, their own needs, feelings,
and desires. Learning to consciously focus more on others helps them to

balance out the compulsive need for freedom with a stronger ability to be
present for and with other people. While Sevens are quite relational and are
actively drawn toward others, they can seek contact with people out of the
same defensive drive for pleasure that motivates many of their key
personality habits. It is important for Sevens to allow themselves the
opportunity to learn to sink more deeply into their connections, not as a way
of finding refuge through stimulation but as a way of bringing the fullness
of their own experience into more intimate contact with all of someone else.
Often this is fun and exciting, but many times it isn’t. Sevens grow through
learning to really “be with” their friends’ and partners’ down moods and
painful struggles as well as with their joys.

Living for or in the future as a way of avoiding being present now
See all the ways you go to “then” to escape from “now.” Just as it is important for Sevens

to observe and examine the ways in which they move toward pleasure to
distance themselves from pain, they can also become more conscious by
noticing how they focus on the future as an escape from the present
moment. If you are a Seven, when you notice yourself becoming absorbed
by a futuristic fantasy, try to see how you could bring what you are longing
for into the present moment. Try focusing on today instead of tomorrow or
next week. Realize that the urge to plan a getaway or take an idealized
journey in the future is a sign that you may be having a hard time accepting
“what is” in the present. One my favorite poets, T. S. Eliot, emphasizes the
importance of being able to live in the present moment in his four-poem
cycle “The Four Quartets.” In these poems, he beautifully communicates an
idea Sevens might do well to heed—that we deprive ourselves of life when
we avoid the present moment, the only “place” in which we can truly live,
by focusing exclusively on “memory or desire.” Eliot writes, “Time past
and time future / Allow but little consciousness,” of the present moment,
which he calls “the still point of the turning world.” Eliot poetically
illustrates this dangerous tendency to escape from the “now,” and thus our
only possibility of consciously living and loving, when he writes, “Desire
itself is movement / Not in itself desirable; / Love is itself unmoving, / Only
the cause of end of movement.”33

Allow for a fuller experience of pain and other uncomfortable emotions. What drives most

people to do inner-growth work is an experience of their pain. As a
psychotherapist who seeks to help people in the most direct and effective
ways possible, I have been advised by more senior therapists to “follow the
pain.” If you can’t allow for a full experience of your painful emotions, it’s
very difficult to have the motivation necessary to do the work entailed in
growing up. This reluctance to fully feel pain is thus part of the character of
the Seven-like archetype of the “puer,” also portrayed through the depiction
of Peter Pan as an “eternal child.” And it’s true that one aspect of the Seven
personality is a desire to not have to “grow up.” All of the personality types
have their own prototypical ways of resisting the growth process, and in
Sevens it takes the shape of wanting to stay with the good feelings and not
enter into the bad ones. So, knowing this, Sevens will need to make a
concerted effort to find ways to more fully engage with the pain that will
motivate their journey “home” to becoming all they can be. Whether
through meditation, through the support of others, or a combination of
supportive practices, Sevens benefit greatly when they can learn to feel
their pain.
Risk living in the present. One simple (and yet not always easy) way Sevens can

begin to make more room for their painful emotions is by practicing living
in the present. Reminding themselves continually to come back into their
bodies and to ground themselves in their breath, or checking in to how they
are feeling, can help Sevens take the risk of not running away from what’s
happening now. Consciously noticing when they get caught up in a fantasy
based in the future and challenging themselves to see what’s wonderful in
the present helps support Sevens’ efforts to slow down and “be here now.”
And if this kind of thing is difficult (or “boring”), it will be important for
Sevens to seek out the help of others to support them. As Sevens learn to be
more still and present, they may then want to find further support for the
difficult feelings that might arise from that practice. It may help them to see
that it is exactly their deeper experience of (all) their embodied feelings in
the present moment that provides them with a portal to the higher capacities
and greater joys of their “oak tree–Self.”

The Inner Flow for Type Seven: Using the Arrow Lines to Chart
Your Growth Path

In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
define one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “stress–
growth” point, and its “child–heart” point map one kind of growth path
described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can be seen to
suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “stress–growth” point ahead
represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally fall back
into as a comfort in times of stress, and now must reintegrate
consciously.

Type Seven Moving Forward to Type One: Consciously Using the
One “Stress–Growth” Point for Development and Expansion

The Inner Flow growth path for Type Sevens brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type One: allowing for a clearer
perception of what is ideal and “right” in a larger sense as a way of
stabilizing a focus on taking action in service of a higher good. Not
surprisingly, Sevens can find the anxiety and frustration they might feel as
they move to One (and potentially become perfectionistic or self-critical)
uncomfortable. But an experience of Type One managed mindfully, can
help Sevens move out of their dreams and fantasies, and into a more
realistic acceptance of standards and limits. When done unconsciously, this
shift may involve an anxious resistance or adherence to the constraints
imposed by rules and routines; but when done more consciously, it can open
Sevens up to the possibility of a supportive structure based on standards and
precision that can help Sevens actualize their ideals. Instead of getting
caught up in living for an imagined or idealized future, Sevens can find
ways to accept the specific constraints that will allow them to put their
plans into action in more pragmatic ways in the present. Sevens can thus be
inspired by the high side of the One Point in ways that both help them
express their impulse toward creative invention and ground what they
actually do in larger notions of the “good” or the “perfect.” Sevens’ focus
on planning and play can, in the extreme, prevent them from moving
forward in serious and disciplined ways; moving to One can help Sevens
make the possibilities they imagine more practical, achievable, and
polished.
The Seven working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools healthy Type Ones use: diligence, discipline, responsibility, and an
intuitive sense of the use of structure for constructive purposes. Ones’
idealistic dedication to the larger social good—rather than their own selfinterest—can inspire Sevens to balance out their healthy self-interest with
selflessness, so that their visions can more usefully fit in with and serve
higher causes. Ones’ natural appreciation of order, structure, and rhythm
can help Sevens implement their plans and creative ideas, providing
routines and processes through which they can bring their dreams into
reality. While Sevens moving to One may defend against what they might
perceive as the boredom or tedium entailed in the One’s focus on detail, a
conscious incorporation of the higher side of the One Point can support
them in learning to blend enthusiasm with practicality as a way of making
things happen. And although freedom-loving Sevens may at first feel

discomfort with potentially embodying the One-ish tendency toward
judgment and evaluation, Ones’ natural knack for objective, critical analysis
can help them structure their imaginative visions and rein in their rebellion
against all limits.
If Sevens can thus moderate the stress-induced tendency to become anal
and controlling through the move to One—if they can find a sense of power
in their One-like ability to stick to schedules and work within structural
(and supportive) constraints—they can achieve a higher integration of their
talent for creative thinking with an appropriate sense of control and
discipline. When they can balance the potential for over-control at the One
Point and the under-control natural to the Seven, they can achieve the
“perfect” blend of seriousness and lightness that can represent a higher and
healthier level of development.

Type Seven Moving Back to Type Five: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Sevens calls for them to reclaim healthy
restraint and the ability to withdraw and reflect that is characteristic of Type
Five. Sevens may have had the experience in childhood that their need to
retreat to a private space as a way of avoiding fear wasn’t okay. They may
have felt like their natural sense of fear and the associated desire to retreat
was unacceptable, so they became more active in managing the outside
world through charm to disarm the limiting potential of outside authorities.
For one reason or another, it may not have been safe or desirable for Sevens
to show their fear or express their need to hold on to precious resources.
Sevens may thus “go to Five” under conditions of stress or security as a
resource point to which they can withdraw to find to a safe place to rest or
to consolidate their position and generate internal support. The move to
Five can thus represent a desire to be less social and less “out there”—to be
more boundaried and safely removed from the social whirl.
For these reasons, “moving back to Five” can be a way that Sevens
retreat from others and moderate their need to be excessively social.
Consciously drawing on the high side of the Five Point can help them find a
healthy way be more internal and more involved in their thoughts in a less
manic way. But because the Five point represents a natural part of Sevens
that they had to repress in childhood and thus may return to compulsively,

Sevens risk getting stuck in the back-and-forth between the overly
optimistic, excessively enthusiastic gregariousness of the Seven and the
total withdrawal of the Five. When Sevens return to the Five Point in an
anxious or unconscious way, it’s likely that Sevens are not so much
reclaiming a healthy sense of privacy and inner calm as they are
temporarily shutting down as an escape from overcommitment and
excessive activity. In addition, as Sandra Maitri suggests, the usually happygo-lucky Seven experiences the move to Five as a childish sense of inner
scarcity motivated by the fear of loss and inner emptiness.34
Navigated consciously, however, a Seven can use the move to Five
developmentally, establishing a healthy balance between the desire to be
involved in the stimulation of the social world and the need to rest and
reinvigorate through a healthy withdrawal from the social scene. Sevens can
focus on the high-side-Five qualities of the inner child they may have had to
repress—such as the need to relax and not have to manage the outside
world through diplomacy and humor—by consciously honoring that part of
them that might need to withdraw, hide out, and enjoy private pleasures,
without fearing inner depletion. Sevens can choose to consciously remind
themselves that it’s okay to retreat once in a while and consolidate their
inner resources. When they can reassure themselves in this way, they can
reintegrate the Five impulse for inner quiet that supports their move forward
on their growth path to the One Point. In this way, Sevens can consciously
shift their attention from the external world to the inner world and make
more objective, thoughtful, considered decisions about how they want to
spend their energy and how they might be more economical in doing it—
how they can more mindfully take care of themselves. This will allow
Sevens to honor their occasional need for solitude as a means of being
thoughtful about what is going on in their lives without becoming
distracted. In this way, they can draw on what they may have needed to
downplay in the past as a source of inner support that can serve them in
taking on the growthful challenges involved in the conscious move to One.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Gluttony and Aiming for Sobriety
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type

Seven, the Vice (or passion) of the type is gluttony, and its opposite, the
Virtue, is sobriety. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to
Virtue conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion
functions and we consciously work toward the embodiment of our higher
Virtue, the more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and
fixated patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side or “oak
tree–Self.”
As Sevens become more familiar with their experience of gluttony and
develop the ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work
further by making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to
the passion of gluttony. In the case of Type Seven, the Virtue of sobriety
represents a state of being that Sevens can attain by consciously manifesting
their higher capacities.
Sobriety is a way of being that is free from the pressure of the
insatiability of the desire for more. The personality is structured around a
need to fill up an inner emptiness; to ease a sense of basic anxiety or
insecurity by helping us get what we think we need in order to feel okay.
Type Seven demonstrates a desire we all have to feel good and avoid
feeling bad. The search for pleasure typified by the Seven is a way for us to
defend against the fear that we aren’t safe and secure enough; through
following an impulse to get more and more of what we believe we need to
feel good—food, sex, fun times, intellectual stimulation—we hope to feel a
sense of inner satisfaction. The problem is, this satisfaction never comes.
The Type Seven dilemma illustrates how we seek and seek for what makes
us feel good, but it never satisfies us because we can never get what we
really need to feel content when our view of life is hemmed in by the
limited view of the personality (the “acorn shell”).
In light of this, sobriety represents the higher attitude that answers the
personality problem illustrated by Type Seven character. Through becoming
sober, we rise above the addiction to pleasure and the need to escape from
pain. We see the falsity of personality-based belief that we will find what
we need by trying to fill ourselves up with more and more of what feels
good. As Sandra Maitri explains, “rather than relating to ourselves as an
emptiness needing to be filled, we begin to relate to ourselves as the
journey itself.”35
For Sevens, then, focusing on sobriety means they work to let go of the
quest for enjoyable experiences in favor of being with the truth of their

experience. Instead of moving away from pain and running toward
pleasure, they allow themselves to be aware of whatever is real and true in
the moment without needing to reach out to try to get more or get away.
Sobriety inspires Sevens to let go of seeking out the “highs” of pleasurable
experiences, whether they are related to physical appetites, intellectual
activity, or spiritual process. So although the word “sobriety” is usually
applied to not drinking alcohol or ingesting other mind-altering substances,
as the virtue of the Seven, it’s larger than this. Maitri quotes Ichazo as
describing sobriety as giving the body “its sense of proportion,” and as
being in a state “firmly grounded in the moment, in which you take in no
more and no less than you need.”36
Embodying sobriety as a Seven means you have examined and worked
hard to be conscious of your hedonistic gluttony bias to the point that you
can make the choice to temper the drive for pleasure that takes you from
“an insufficient here to a promising there.”37 Achieving sobriety means you
can be more grounded in the here-and-now reality of your true feelings,
thoughts, and sensations, and that you have begun to understand that true
satisfaction lies in valuing your authentic experience of yourself rather than
seeking ephemeral pleasures.
When Sevens can do the “Vice to Virtue” work of noticing how they feel
driven to feel good as a way of not feeling bad, they have the power to
wake up to the fears and insecurities that may fuel their need to grasp for
what’s positive. In owning and fully experiencing their fear, and any other
painful emotions they may have, they model for all of us how to overcome
the pressure to defend against pain and instead open up to the deeper truth
of who we are, trusting that we can find a sense of joy and well-being
through being present to our own wholeness.

Specific Work for the Three Type Seven Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
Whatever type you are, the path from observing your passion to finding its
antidote is not exactly the same for each of the subtypes. The path of
conscious self-work has been characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and
grace:”38 the “grit” of our personality programming; the “grind” of our
efforts to grow; and the “grace” that naturally comes to us when we
sincerely work toward the higher virtue of our type. Naranjo explains that

each subtype has to grind, or exert effort, against something slightly
different. This insight is one of the great benefits of understanding the three
distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.
can travel the path from gluttony to sobriety by
observing and owning the way self-interest in support of the drive for
security can lead you to unconsciously close yourself off to a greater realm
of experience. If you are this Seven, be aware of how you may narrow your
focus on what’s important in life based on fears and anxieties you may not
be aware of and then work to open up to experiencing the presence of these
deeper motives. You can aim for sobriety by noticing how you stay alert for
opportunities and seeing that tendency as a potential sign of a deeper fear
that you won’t have enough to survive or stay comfortable. When relating
to others, work to be conscious of all the motives and underlying feelings
that influence your actions. Surface any anxiety and pain as a first step to
tempering your drives for self-preservation and pleasure. Recognize when
your pursuit of your needs and your self-interest may impact others in
negative ways, and explore the ways in which you might rationalize doing
whatever you want and getting whatever you need, even when it narrows
your perspective or allows you to justify harm you might (unintentionally)
do. Allow yourself to sink more deeply into an enjoyment of the people you
are close to by connecting more consciously with all of yourself. As you
work to accept and allow all of your feelings, you will be reminded that the
greatest joy comes from a total and complete openness to the full
experience of yourself and others.
Self-Preservation Sevens

Social Sevens can travel the path from gluttony to sobriety by making the

motives behind the things they do more conscious. If you are a Social
Seven, try to be more aware of the desire to be recognized for your sacrifice
or helpfulness—for being “good”—without judging yourself for being
selfish or self-centered. Observe and work with the glutton/anti-glutton
polarity within you, and try to be open to seeing what fears and needs might
underlie that internal dynamic. Watch out for feelings and motives you
might not own that drive you, and support yourself in accepting all your
needs and feelings as valid and important. Allow yourself to see how you
might criminalize selfishness and avoid internal conflict and darker
motives. Challenge yourself to be honest about the ways in which you may

confuse altruism and self-interest. Surface the truth about your deeper
motives while at the same time making an effort not to judge yourself as
“bad” for any self-interest you uncover. Don’t let your fear about not being
seen as “good” get in the way of being more conscious of what’s really true.
Recognize how you may manipulate through enthusiasm and use your
idealism as an intellectual drug. And allow yourself to see how you might
cling to your idealism and your ideals of service to the group as a way of
staving off an inner sense of emptiness. Support yourself in feeling and
being with any fears you might have about your worth or your essential
goodness. Give yourself credit for your good intentions, and make room to
see all your intentions and your limitations with compassion.
Sexual Sevens can travel the path from gluttony to sobriety by noticing when

they are living in their imagination rather than in reality and allowing
themselves to explore why they’re doing so and what’s happening inside
them when they allow this. If you are this Seven, learn to distinguish
between fantasy and reality. Work on understanding your need to embellish
reality and idealize people and things, and explore the motives and feelings
behind those tendencies. Be alert to identifying “logical arguments” and
rationalizations that support fantasies that prevent you from growing and
moving forward. Recognize when a rose-colored view of something is
masking a deeper frustration or fear, and work to unearth those deeper
feelings. Work on learning how to tolerate frustration so you can get more
of what you want and need in the real world and don’t have to subsist on
fantasy. Notice if you are engaging in passive-aggressive rebellion of any
kind, and investigate what might be motivating it. Work to get in touch with
your deeper feelings, including fear, sadness, or anger. Be honest with
yourself when you think you are working on a relationship but you are
actually just “working on it” in your imagination. Be open to recognizing
when you get disappointed in the reality of something; when it doesn’t
measure up to your idealization of it; and when anxiety may be clouding
your vision of what’s happening. Support yourself in getting in touch with
any anxiety you might be feeling instead of acting it out through enthusiasm
and a drive for pleasure.

Conclusion

JUST AS THE SEVEN POINT represents the way we avoid feeling pain and focus
on pleasure in order to cope with a world that seems to threaten to trap us in
fear and bad feelings, the Seven path of growth shows us how to use an
awareness of our pain to fully awaken to the “good” and the “bad” of all
that we are so that we can grow into all we can be. In each of the Type
Seven subtypes we see a specific character who teaches us what is possible
when we can turn our fear of fear and our unconscious aversion to pain into
a fully awake ability to live from the reality of who we are and how we feel,
opening up to our higher capacities through the alchemy of selfobservation, self-development, self-acceptance, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 6

The Point Six Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
In the best of times, “security” has never been more than
temporary and apparent.
—Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity:
A Message for An Age of Anxiety

Courage is not simply one of the virtues,
but the form of every virtue at its testing point.
—C. S. Lewis

TYPE SIX REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who, given the fear of
impending threat, seeks to find safety through the protection of others or by
taking refuge in their own strength. The drive of this archetype is to scan for
danger in a scary world and defensively manage fear and anxiety through
fight, flight, or friends.
Type Sixes are thus the prototype for that tendency in all of us that needs
to find a sense of security in the world in the face of the fears that naturally
arise as part of being human—fears we feel (especially) as we seek to disidentify with our personality. All the personality types feel afraid in
different ways, but the Six’s placement on the Enneagram map
communicates the idea that “as long as we are identified with our
personality structure, we live in fear.”1 The “acorn-self” doesn’t know a life
without fear; only the “oak tree–Self” grows beyond fear and anxiety.
As part of the foundational inner triangle of the Enneagram, the Six Point
represents a basic step in the path of transformation we all must take in
order to transcend the ego. After observing our habitual patterns so that we
can dis-identify with, or separate from, our ego-personality (symbolized by
the Three Point), we must all do the work it takes to find a way to face our
fears, work through the anxiety that arises from losing our egos, and

contend with the emotions our personality arose to defend us against in the
first place.
The Six Point sheds light on the psychological fear of letting down our
defenses—the anxiety that inevitably occurs when we courageously allow
ourselves to be vulnerable and unguarded, but which must be overcome if
we are to grow toward union with our true selves. Sandra Maitri highlights
the fact that while today we are “far less centered around survival than in
previous eras,” as many of us no longer have the search for food and shelter
as the main focus of our lives, “this has not diminished our fear.”2
Sixes thus represent the prototype for the universal human tendency to
contract in fear and develop a personality that will protect us when we are
young—a response to the understandable fear associated with being a small
person in a big world. Psychologists talk about “basic trust” as an early
stage of growth necessary to feeling a sense of well-being in the world.3 If
we can’t achieve a certain level of faith and trust in our environment, it’s
hard (or impossible) to live our lives and develop our inherent capacities.
The Six archetype, like the widely known phrase “fight or flight,”
illustrates the basic range of normal human reactions to fear. (Sometimes
“freeze” is also included as a basic response to fear, as in “fight, flight, or
freeze.”) As in all animals, it is clear that fear represents a vital survival
mechanism in humans, in that it alerts us to the presence of danger. In the
three Type Six subtype personalities, we see how three basic, but distinct,
responses to fear shape the personality.4
The three kinds of Sixes reflect specific reactions to fear, both in the
natural world and in civilized society: when we feel fear, we can either run
away, get tough and fight, or seek the protection of someone we perceive as
stronger. This makes it challenging to describe Type Sixes in terms of one
set of characteristics. It also explains why the three Type Six subtypes differ
so markedly. The complex emotional, thought, and behavioral patterns
associated with fear are at the center of what motivates the three Six
personalities in three very different ways.
In society, we find the theme of the Six archetype expressed in power
dynamics, “us against them” attitudes, authoritarianism, and all forms of
hierarchy. Naranjo connects fear with authority and power because it stems
from an experience in childhood of being small in the presence of our
parents, who, in the eyes of a child, seem like giants. The father figure is the
archetypal symbol—if not the real executor—of authority in most homes,

and so the father-child relationship serves as a template for our experience
of power relationships (relations between a superior and an inferior) from
then onward.5 As Naranjo puts it, “Fear is therefore a passion that leads in
the social world to the existence of the bossy and the bossed.”6
Sixes have excellent analytical minds and they can be extremely loyal
and steadfast friends to those they trust. They are good strategists,
troubleshooters, and problem-solvers. Practiced in living with an underlying
sense of anxiety, Sixes can be calm and effective in a crisis. They can be
courageous rebels against exploitive authorities or sincere advocates for
underdog causes. Naturally intuitive, they read people well and their
specific “superpower” is their talent for seeing through false pretenses and
detecting ulterior motives and hidden agendas.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Sixes’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel:” while Sixes are
great critical thinkers, they can get stuck in doubt, endless questioning, and
overanalysis. They excel at planning and preparation, but can focus too
much on worst-case scenarios and what might go wrong, so much so that
they can fail to move forward and take action. They can trip themselves up
by worrying too much, allowing anxiety to drive them, or by denying their
fear through aggression and risky behavior. They may question authority in
important ways, or fixate on doubt, mistrust, or rebellion with respect to
authorities. They can get stuck in contrarian thinking and become
indecisive. And they can confuse accurate intuition with the projection of
their own fears onto others.
When they can balance their tendencies to act out unconscious forms of
fear and anxiety with true insight and clear-minded analysis, Sixes can be
wise, deeply thoughtful, and faithful friends, allies, and counselors.
The Type Six Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey:
The Laestrygonian Disaster
Although Odysseus and his men face many harrowing situations
on their journey, the encounter with the Laestrygonians is the one
that proves the most frightening—and the most disastrous.
After six days and six nights of rowing, Odysseus moors his
twelve ships in a seemingly peaceful harbor. His landing party
meets the daughter of the king, and she directs them to his castle.

As the three men enter, they are horrified by the Laestrygonians’
monstrous queen. She calls for her king, and the two giants attack
the men, tearing one of them apart and eating him.
As the survivors flee back to the ships, hundreds of giant
Laestrygonians race down to the harbor. They bombard the
twelve ships with boulders. Only the strength born of abject terror
saves the ship that Odysseus captains:
‘Put your backs in the oar—now row or die!’ In terror of
death they ripped the swells—all as one—and what joy as
we darted out toward open sea, clear of those beetling
cliffs…my ship alone. But the rest went down en masse. Our
squadron sank.7
The Laestrygonians are powerful enough to fear no one. But they
react aggressively and immediately on the assumption that
anyone approaching them must be an enemy. Like an outsized
symbol of the low side of the Type Six personality, they are
fixated on negative expectations and see only threats. The
Laestrygonians are on the alert for trouble to the point of being
paranoid, and they do not pause for rational explanation or an
investigation of what’s really true once fear takes hold.8

The Type Six Personality Structure
LOCATED ON THE LEFT CORNER of the Enneagram’s inner triangle, Sixes are
the “core point” of the “head-based” triad, associated with the core emotion
of fear and a concern with safety. In a world they experience as dangerous
and uncertain, their focus centers on thinking about what might go wrong
and strategizing and preparing for potential problems. Their thoughts focus
both on real possible pitfalls and the trouble they create in their heads
through imagination; but in either case they often find it difficult to stop
worrying about their internally generated negative expectations.

While fear represents both the core emotion of the head-based triad as
well as the passion or “chief feature” of the Six, Sixes vary in their level of
awareness that they act from fear—some Sixes may not be consciously
aware that fear drives many of their defensive habits. Each of the three
types based in the head center have a relationship to an early experience of
fear that gave shape to their personality. Whereas Fives become detached
and minimize their need for others, and Sevens focus on what is positive
and exciting, Sixes try to understand threats and uncertain outcomes so that
they can prevent something bad from happening.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Six
The Type Six personality usually begins with a child who experienced some
sort of ongoing threatening situation early in life. This is an individual who
gets an early sense that the world is a dangerous place. Sixes often tell
stories of living with a parent who was an alcoholic or mentally ill or
violent or too weak to protect them. They may have experienced shifting
expectations, objectively dangerous conditions, or periodic punishments.
Living with some form of untrustworthy, unpredictable, or inconsistent
caretaker, the Six child develops a coping strategy centered on becoming an
expert at picking up small cues that signal the presence of danger or threat.
They specialize in detecting signs that help them know what is going to
happen next, which allows them to prepare for and otherwise proactively
deal with challenging or scary situations. This skill shapes the child’s basic
way of taking in and processing information from the outside world.
Sixes thus develop a way of absorbing and sorting information based on
picking up on signs, subtle or not, of the negative or threatening intentions

of others. Being able to predict when and if someone was going to hurt
them was their way of trying to stay safe. Eventually, the automatic sorting
process of a Six’s mind gets attuned to detecting incongruities or whatever
lies beneath the surface of things.
In conscious and unconscious ways, Sixes become focused on perceiving
negative data in the world and looking out for and thinking about dangerous
or problematic things that might happen before they happen. Through
imagination, Sixes develop a radar for trouble that they can’t turn off. While
this habit makes them highly intuitive and analytical, these tendencies can
also get skewed toward worst-case scenario thinking, projection, and selffulfilling prophecy. Sixes get good at detecting what may lie beneath a false
presentation, but they also mentally manufacture dangers that don’t exist to
confirm their internal sense of threat or doubt.
As mentioned above, Sixes’ survival responses to fear are analogous to
“fight or flight” reactions. The “flight” (or fearful, “phobic”) strategy is to
run away, to hide or somehow withdraw, or to seek the protection of others.
The “fight” (or fear-denying, “counter-phobic”) strategy is to move toward
the perceived source of danger and manage it through strength or
intimidation. In the middle of these two ends of the fear-response spectrum
is a third fear-based survival strategy that represents a mixture of phobic
and counterphobic reactions and constitutes finding safety in obeying or
adhering to an authority. While this authority may be an actual person, it is
very often the “impersonal” authority of a set of guiding rules or reference
points—a system of knowledge or an ideology about how one should
behave.
In light of their history with inconsistent or threatening authority figures,
Sixes both wish for a truly good authority (sometimes unconsciously) and
question and rebel against the authorities in their lives. Being habitually
suspicious of anyone who might have power over them, the defensive
strategy of the Six involves a wariness or skepticism toward unfamiliar
others in general, and especially authority figures. Importantly, however, the
three Six subtype characters vary with respect to their approaches to
authority. The Self-Preservation (phobic) Six tends to be the most quietly
avoidant; the Social Six the most yielding and compliant; and the Sexual
(counter-phobic) Six, the most competitive and rebellious. Despite this,
however, all three have the tendency to be suspicious and anti-authoritarian
if the conditions call for it.

Often, Sixes’ issues with authority grow out of an early experience with
an authoritarian father or an overprotective mother. A threatening father
figure reinforces a child’s fear of rejection or punishment, and an anxious or
overprotective mother can send the child a message that the world is not
safe and that he or she does not have the inner resources to deal with
external threats. However, a Six’s father may have also been absent or weak
—and the specific father a given Six had may influence their dominant
subtype. Naranjo suggests that Sixes who are inclined toward hero worship
and insecurity (Self-Preservation or Social Sixes) often display an excessive
need for a good father they didn’t have, while Sixes who tend toward
grandiosity and a heroic view of themselves (Sexual Sixes) likely
experienced a rivalry or competition with their fathers (or took the place of
a weak father).9
The Six child thus often suffers from the lack of a good “first authority,”
someone who would have provided a model of confidence and security in
meeting threats. In light of this, the Six coping strategy can be viewed as a
compensation for the lack of a strong, protective, benevolent father figure.
Jack, a Sexual Six, describes his childhood situation and the
development of his coping strategy:
Jack was the oldest of three children. From the time he was born,
his mother suffered from migraine headaches. She usually
managed to cope during the week, but would get a debilitating
migraine every Friday. At that time, there were no medications
available that would ease her pain, so she would be out of
commission for the entire weekend. Jack’s father (a Type Five)
was very absent. With his mother often unavailable and his father
not able to be present, Jack experienced life as uncertain and his
authority figures as undependable. In this situation, Jack came to
feel that he had to be independent because he could only really
rely on himself.
Jack’s mother was a phobic Six, and Jack internalized her belief
that the world was an unsafe place. Her anxious focus on safety
contributed to Jack having an underlying sense of fear. His father
was not a good role model of strength and Jack would get angry
when his mother would berate his father in front of other people

and his dad wouldn’t stand up for himself. He would feel mad at
his mother for humiliating his father and pissed off at his father
for being so passive. He can see that his drive to be strong and
independent grew out of the painful experience of witnessing his
parents’ conflicts and needing to go off on his own as a way to
escape them.
Jack learned early on that he had to be his own authority. While
he really wants and looks for a strong authority in his life, he
owns that he’s very particular and he’s always on alert and
looking for incongruities in others’ behaviors, whether in a
potential authority figure or his other relationships. There have
only been a few authority figures in his life that he’s had a high
regard for because he can’t help believing they can’t be relied on.
He looks for good authorities and people he can trust, but keeps
expecting them to let him down or prove themselves
untrustworthy. Even in his friendships, he’s always “waiting for
the other shoe to drop.” His wife is the only person in his life he’s
ever been able to be with and relax his habit of being vigilant.

The Main Type Six Defense Mechanisms:
Projection and Splitting
The primary defense mechanism of Type Six is projection. As in the case of
introjection, when someone engages in projection as a psychological
protection, the psychological boundary between the self and the world
disappears. When Sixes “project,” they unconsciously disown something
originating inside themselves and “project it onto,” or experience it as
belonging to, someone on the outside.
As psychologist Nancy McWilliams explains, “projection is a process
whereby what is inside is misunderstood as coming from outside. In its
benign and mature forms, it is the basis for empathy…In its malignant
forms, projection breeds dangerous misunderstandings.”10 Oriented to
detecting threats, Sixes psychologically defend themselves from their own
internal sense of fear by unconsciously projecting it out or “getting rid of
it,” imagining that it originates in the outside world, often in another person.
For example, if a Six is feeling judgmental of or insecure about herself, she
may imagine that someone else is judging her. By locating the fear as

coming from someone on the outside, she can avoid the pain of her own
judgment or insecurity and then manage (or seek to control) the pain of
inner judgment by relating to that other person in particular ways.
Just as Fours use the defense mechanism of introjection to manage an
outside threat by experiencing it as being inside themselves so they can
better control it, Sixes deal with uncomfortable feelings like fear and selfdoubt by experiencing them as being caused by someone else. By
attributing the motives, feelings, or thoughts they do not want to
acknowledge in themselves to another person, they expel them from their
internal experience and feel safer on the inside. If someone else is causing
them to experience a bad feeling, they can move away from them or be nice
to them. For Sixes, managing a bad feeling that comes from the inside can
be harder or more threatening to address. Thus, projection allows Type Six
individuals to escape the blame and threat related to their feelings and
thoughts by placing those feelings outside of themselves, thereby allowing
the Six to believe that uncomfortable feelings are caused by other people.
Although projection serves as a defense, easing a sense of inner threat, it
can also cause many problems, as McWilliams notes: “When the projected
attitudes seriously distort the object on whom they are projected, or when
what is projected consists of disowned and highly negative parts of the self,
all kinds of difficulties predictably ensue. Others resent being misperceived
and may retaliate when treated, for example, as judgmental, envious, or
persecutory.”11 The habit of projecting fear and other inner experiences
onto others also leads to feelings and behaviors that can be said to be
suspicious or paranoid in nature, because when you habitually locate the
source of your own fear and discomfort in other people, you unconsciously
create reasons to suspect them, mistrust them, or regard them as dangerous
and potentially threatening.
In addition to projection, Sixes also make use of a second primary
defense mechanism: splitting. Splitting originates in an early stage of
childhood and relates to the infant’s need to organize its perceptions of
“objects” (others in the outside world) in terms of “good” and “bad.”
Developing at a time before young children can comprehend the fact that
good and bad qualities can coexist in one person or one experience (this is
called ambivalence, and is achieved at a later stage), splitting operates
defensively to reduce anxiety and maintain self-esteem.12

We can see evidence of splitting—both in an individual and on a
collective level—when someone makes one person or group all bad or all
good. This happens in politics when one side demonizes their opponents,
and in wars when we perceive the enemy as completely evil. In individual
psyches, and, more specifically, within the psychology of a Type Six
individual, a person can use splitting to clearly demarcate who is good and
who is bad as a way of feeling less fear—they locate the “badness,” or the
source of fear, in a clear way so as to more easily cope with it. If you see
yourself as bad and others as good, you can try to be better and rely on
others to protect you. If you see yourself as good and others as bad, you can
maintain your self-esteem and use your positive internal resources to
protect you from a specific, localized threat from the outside.
Splitting is the psychological reason why many Sixes experience a large
degree of guilt and self-accusation, and a firm belief that they are somehow
bad. It can go both ways, however, with the Six viewing some other person
—someone whom they dislike or see as untrustworthy—as all bad, even
when that other person objectively possesses both “bad” and “good” traits.

The Type Six Focus of Attention
Sixes develop a way of being in the world based on the habit of paying
selective attention to potential threats and imaginatively elaborating what
might happen as their defensive basis for coping with danger. They tend to
be alert to the complexities of things and to focus their analytical minds on
perceiving and understanding all the varied aspects of situations and people.
The focus of Type Sixes also centers on doubting and questioning
themselves, other people, and data in the outside world—the specific focus
of their doubt varies by subtype.
Driven by an underlying need for safety in what they experience as a
world full of potential dangers, Sixes focus on the negative data in their
environment (or their own heads) that might signal the presence of threats
to their security. When encountering others, Sixes tend to harbor an initial
attitude of wariness and mistrust, questioning the other people’s motives
until they get a read on what their intentions are. People are watched until
they earn the Six’s trust through experience or evidence. In looking for
danger by perceiving and intuiting the “negative” data in a situation—in
focusing on the search itself—Sixes sometimes end up creating it.

If something the Six perceives stirs up suspicion, their thoughts can move
to creating worst-case scenarios. Generally, Sixes tend to trust their own
radar for trouble and their intuitive ability to pick up on small amounts of
information in the environment to determine what might happen and what
preparations might be needed. Sometimes this habit of attention leads to an
accurate and insightful reading of a situation or a deep or intuitive
understanding of what is going on; at other times, however, Sixes can fill in
the gaps in the objective data they’ve collected with fear-based thoughts
about what is happening. In other words, they can unknowingly
(unconsciously) project their fear-based, imagination-fueled thinking to
create a threat where none exists.
Sixes tend to focus attention on authorities, either looking for a good
authority to guide their actions or regarding people in positions of authority
with suspicion. They often feel suspicious about people who wield power,
questioning whether they will use it well or not. Sixes also tend to naturally
focus positive attention on underdogs and underdog causes because they
understand what it’s like to feel vulnerable and threatened by authority
figures who might seek to dominate or oppress others.
Focusing on and taking a “devil’s advocate” or contrarian stance is
another aspect of the way Sixes pay attention. Sixes typically question or
oppose people who express strong opinions. They habitually focus on
alternative views or contrary positions as a way of getting to the truth,
fleshing out the complexity of an issue, or challenging or testing people by
promoting a view that has been denied or left out. Continually questioning
and analyzing everything can make Sixes feel more secure, because they
are gathering more data to generate or confirm certainty. They look for
holes in an argument, both to push others to prove their trustworthiness (or
their deeper intentions) and to get to the truth. This habit of taking the role
of a devil’s advocate and noticing what might go wrong makes Sixes good
troubleshooters, a role they often play in the workplace.
To people with other personality types, Sixes may appear to dwell on the
negative, or to be suspicious, paranoid, or pessimistic, but Sixes usually do
not see themselves as having a pessimistic outlook. Rather, they tend to
perceive themselves as realistic, or even idealistic, in that they are trying to
achieve the best-case scenario by performing a thorough analysis of each
situation and assessing what might go wrong.

The Type Six Emotional Passion: Fear
Fear is a universal emotion central to assuring survival in all animals—and

it’s the passion of Type Six. As the emotional passion that gives shape to
the Six personality, fear can take many forms and can be more or less
conscious. It can take the form of a fear of the unknown; it can motivate
anxiety and obsessive worrying about potential threats to well-being; or it
can feel like self-doubt and uncertainty. It can be experienced as guilt and
shame related to your sense of self, or it can surface as a conviction that
someone means you harm or can’t be trusted. Fear can be constant and
paralyzing; it can motivate obedience to rules and order to maintain control
and safety; or it can manifest as a forceful counterreaction of aggression
born of a desire (or impulse) to attack when afraid.
Closely related to fear, anxiety is also a central characteristic of the Type
Six personality. Anxiety is a state of “apprehension, tension, or uneasiness
from anticipation of danger.”13 It is differentiated from fear in that fear is
seen as an emotional response to a “consciously recognized and usually
external threat or danger,” whereas anxiety is primarily of “intrapsychic
origin”14—that is, anxiety is something we create in our heads in response
to an unknown or unrecognized threat.
Often, anxiety occurs even when there isn’t a clear sense of imminent
threat, because anxiety often stems from a fear of fear itself or of something
that we imagine or only dimly perceive. Naranjo likens anxiety to a “frozen
fear or a frozen alarm before danger that has ceased to threaten (though it
continues to be imagined).”15 Sixes tend to feel anxiety related to fear when
they imagine fearful scenarios or anticipate that they will be endangered or
threatened. Often, anxiety can attach to social situations, and Sixes may fear
that they will be judged, criticized, or otherwise threatened by other people.
Their hesitance or discomfort with regard to social situations may be related
to self-doubt or a habit of suspecting others’ motives and judgments. Doubt
or the inability to act in the face of anxiety can further intensify their
anxiety, and thus the anxious tendencies of a Six can become cyclical, selfreinforcing, and hard to break out of.
Whichever form fear and anxiety take, these emotional experiences, and
Sixes’ internal efforts to cope with them, give rise to a defensive structure
based on patterns designed to find ways to survive in the face of threats,
whether they are commonly felt as overwhelming or only vaguely sensed.

The Type Six Cognitive Mistake:
“Thinking the World is a Dangerous Place Makes It More So” or
“Just Because I’m Paranoid Doesn’t Mean Someone Isn’t Out to
Get Me”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and this continues even after the mental models that
create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore.16 While the passion
shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation” or
“cognitive mistake” preoccupies the personality’s thought processes.

From the outside, the thoughts and beliefs that typically drive Sixes may
seem overly negative. However, they seem to Sixes like smart ways to
prepare or strategize to meet problems should they arise, giving them a
(potentially false) sense of control. Type Sixes’ core beliefs reflect themes
of what it takes to perceive and manage threat and risk; create safety and
find security in the face of real dangers in the world; and cope with the
anxiety inspired by having an active, fear-fueled imagination.
To support the passion of fear, Sixes hold the following core beliefs as
psychological organizing principles:

The world is a dangerous place, and you must be alert to and
aware of signs of trouble in order to stay safe.
By imagining the worst thing that could happen, you can
prepare for it and thus potentially protect yourself or ward it

off in advance.
By expecting and anticipating what might go wrong, you can
guard against making mistakes, getting hurt, or becoming
trapped in a bad situation.
Imminent catastrophe could strike at any time, and if you
aren’t prepared, you will be less able to prevent it or deal with
it.
Searching for certainty and gathering information in an
uncertain world is one way to feel safer.
It’s difficult to completely trust anything (or anyone) because
there’s always room for doubt.
It’s good to be on guard about how people might threaten you,
hurt you, or take advantage of you, so you won’t be taken by
surprise and unable to protect yourself.
Phobic: By focusing on the ways in which I am vulnerable to
others, I can take steps to minimize my vulnerability.
Counterphobic: By focusing on the challenges I must meet as I
move through life, I can think about ways to overcome those
difficulties by proactively meeting them with strength and
forcefulness.
Although the Six’s preoccupation with thoughts of managing risk and
danger are originally resorted to as a way of maintaining a sense of safety—
giving them a sense of control in an uncertain, fearful environment—in
adulthood, they can actually lead to more anxiety and stress, as it can seem
impossible for the Six to ever feel certain or safe enough.

The Type Six Trap:
“When You Expect Something to Go Wrong, It Usually Does” or
“Danger is Where You Find It”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Six leads
the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the limitations

of the personality cannot resolve. Given their life strategy and focus of
attention, Sixes experience a conflict between their habits, which are
designed to help them feel safe in a threatening world, and the fact that
these defensive maneuvers actually work to keep them stuck in anxiety,
fear, and insecurity.
Sixes’ core beliefs keep them fixated in a threatening world because their
unremitting focus on fear and related imaginings can have the effect of
intensifying, rather than diminishing, their perceptions of threats. Sixes’
over-focus on thoughts about what might go wrong can lead to selfsabotage and self-fulfilling prophecies, as creating fearful scenarios in your
mind and acting on them can have the unintended effect of manifesting your
fears. To the extent that our reality tends to be shaped by our beliefs and
perceptions, Sixes can inadvertently create more danger through the mental
activity that is designed to help them escape it.

The Key Type Six Traits
Hypervigilance

Closely related to Sixes’ anxiety is their trait of hypervigilance. With fear as
a central characteristic, whether conscious or not, it follows that the Six
individual is motivated to frequently be “on alert” to signs of danger or
threat or things going wrong. By nature suspicious and overly cautious, the
Six’s disposition tends to be characterized by a hyperalertness to clues that
might reveal hidden dangers. What Naranjo describes as a “state of chronic
arousal” serves as a way to gather data to reduce uncertainty, to protect
oneself against negative surprises, and to interpret a potentially dangerous
reality in an ongoing way.
By continually watching for signs of problems and other negative data,
the Six engages in a habitual defensive behavior; being in a constant state of
vigilance makes sense to a person who tends to imagine that the worst could
happen. Being highly alert all the time is a natural consequence of the belief
that we live in a dangerous world. And often this belief is supported by
painful experience. Just as people who suffer from post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) tend to remain hypervigilant and anxious about
experiencing a repeat of a trauma they actually experienced, Sixes can
maintain an alert focus based on a fear of something they suffered in the
past happening again.

Theoretical Orientation

Fear contributes to a lack of certainty about what to do and how to act, so
the Six continually looks for good data to base decisions on, then processes
that data mentally, applying logic, reason, and rationality as a way to make
the best decision about what to do.
As Naranjo points out, the Type Six “is not only an intellectual type, but
also the most logical of types, one who is devoted to reason.” He goes on to
say that “in his need for answers to solve his problems, type VI is more than
any other a questioner, and thus a potential philosopher.”17 The Six lives in
the realm of intellect, not only as a method of solving problems, but also as
a way of “problem-seeking” in an attempt to feel safe.
The tendency to focus on the theoretical provides Sixes with a mental
means of combating fear and indecisiveness; it also represents a
consequence of a fearful holding back. The Six attempts to find safety in
the thought process itself—through their excessive orientation to thinking
and the abstract—but can frequently get stuck there, trapped in an endless
cycle of thinking and applying logic and then questioning their conclusions,
which then necessitates further thinking and reasoning. Sixes thus seek
refuge in the abstract and theoretical, but this tendency also represents a
trap that can prevent them from acting in the world.
Orientation to Authority

The orientation to authority is one of the most distinct Six traits. Usually as
a result of the echo of early experiences with authority figures—parents,
generally—Type Six individuals have specific attitudes toward authorities
that vary according to the three Six subtypes. Sixes live in a hierarchical
world, and they both love and hate authorities, reflecting the early
experience of both loving a parent and hating being dominated or somehow
punished by that same parent.
Naranjo summarizes how experience with parental authorities
archetypally structures the three distinct variations of authority issues
displayed by the three kinds of Sixes:
What the aggressive [Sexual], the dutiful [Social], and the affectionate
[Self-Preservation] safety maneuvers have in common is their
relevance to authority. We may say the fear of enneatype VI was
originally aroused by parental authority and the threat of punishment

by the power-wielding parent—usually the father. Just as originally
this fear led to sweetness [Self-Preservation], obedience [Social], or
defiance [Sexual] (and usually ambivalence) toward his parents, now
he continues to behave and feel the same in the face of others to whom
he assigns authority.18
Most Sixes, including the Self-Preservation Six (who may not openly
oppose authority), report that they feel some anti-authoritarian feelings.
Usually Sixes describe experiencing some sort of suspicion, questioning,
and mistrust in relation to authority figures, and some may also frequently
rebel or work against authority. Of course, this skepticism toward
authorities can be a strength—some authorities may not be benevolent, and
Sixes can show great courage in challenging unjust authority figures—but
at other times, on the low side, this characteristic can indicate paranoia and
an inability to accept any authority, even a well-intentioned one. With the
tendency to question what is happening, and a natural distrust of those in
power, there may be few authorities in a given Six’s life who can pass the
trust test.
Doubt and Ambivalence

Having a “doubting mind” is a key characteristic of Type Six. Built in to the
way a Six thinks is a tendency to doubt and question nearly everything.
This reflects both an anxiety about the intentions of others and a need to
feel secure through testing and mentally evaluating people and ideas. Prone
to both self-doubt and doubting others, the Six coping strategy of being
alert to signs of threat relies on the habit of doubting what is true as a way
of attempting to find safety. In this way, Sixes can be seen to both invalidate
themselves through constant self-doubt and doubt others through the
expression of suspicion, with the different subtypes doing one more than the
other.
Naranjo describes the situation of a Six in doubt when he states, “he
doubts himself and he doubts his doubt; he is suspicious of others, and yet
he is afraid that he may be mistaken. The result of this double perspective
is, of course, chronic uncertainty in regard to choosing a course of action,
and the consequent anxiety.”19 Beyond the attitude of an “accusatory
inquisitor” of self and other, the role of doubt in the Six character reflects
the uncertainty of the Six in regard to his views: he both invalidates himself

and he props himself up. Individual Sixes may feel both persecuted and
grandiose.
Ambivalence and indecisiveness are natural outgrowths of doubt in that
doubting leads to an inability to emerge from ambivalence and to clarify
ambiguity. As Naranjo points out, despite the fact that ambiguity causes
anxiety in a Six, they are the most explicitly ambivalent of all the character
types. Ambivalence is an early theme for Sixes: when you both love and
fear a childhood authority, it can lead to a profound sense of ambivalence.
Thus, doubt and ambivalence reflect the ongoing inner conflict a Six
experiences between pleasing others and rebelling against them, admiring
others and trying to invalidate them.
Contrarian Thinking

Another manifestation of doubt and the search for certainty is evident in the
Six habit of contrarian thinking. This characteristic is evident in Sixes’
tendency to voice an opposing idea to whatever the dominant opinion of the
moment is. As a way of looking for the right answer and defending against
heedlessly accepting someone else’s power to dominate, when Sixes hear a
statement or an opinion, they often automatically speak to the other side.
This is why the Type Six is sometimes called the “Devil’s Advocate” or the
“Contrarian.”
It can feel dangerous to Sixes to immediately buy into someone else’s
point of view, so their habit of contrarian thinking constitutes a defensive
strategy—a way to prevent being quickly taken over by someone else’s
wrong idea. By instantaneously being able to argue the other side of any
argument, the Six tendency to engage in contrarian thinking allows them to
go up against others who would try to persuade them as a way of attempting
to dominate them.
Contrarian thinking also creates a scenario in which doubt (and,
potentially, unconscious fear) motivates a kind of forced investigation
through an immediate argument about what is really true. Both as a way to
avoid domination and a way to search for the right answer, contrarian
thinking allows Sixes to feel like they will not be easily taken over or
influenced in a way that might be dangerous.
This kind of thinking also underscores the intellectual, logical nature of
the Six personality. If you have an orientation to the theoretical and the
abstract, you can naturally generate opposing arguments quite easily.

However, like doubt, the tendency to engage in contrarian thinking can
cause the Six to get lost in the endless back and forth of debate. And while
this style of thinking can be useful in forestalling easy domination of one
point over another, it often fails to bring about certainty, and only leads to
more argument.
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy

Because Sixes have the habit and primary defense mechanism of projection,
which is rooted in fear, they also have the tendency toward self-fulfilling
prophecy. Here’s how this works: the Six experiences a feeling that is
threatening—perhaps a fear about himself, a feeling that he is too weak or
that people don’t like him—and to protect himself from the pain or fear of
this feeling, he unconsciously projects it out onto someone else. So, the Six
starts by doubting himself and feeling fearful about his own inadequacies,
and then he projects that fear and corresponding negative self-evaluation
onto someone else. The Six then perceives that other person, the projectee
—who may not have been feeling negatively toward the Six at all—as
having negative thoughts about and threatening feelings toward him, and he
bases the way he acts toward that person on this perception/projection. In
response to the way the Six is acting, the other person then develops
negative feelings about the Six. In this way, the Six’s initial feeling
experience, which at the outset is not real, becomes real—becomes a selffulfilling prophecy.
In this way, the fear and anxiety characteristic of the Six personality can
have the effect of actually creating problems and negative circumstances
where none existed in the first place. The influence of Sixes’ fear and selfdoubt (and aggression, in the case of the Sexual Six) on other people and
external situations can actually cause Sixes’ fear-based suspicions and
expectations to be fulfilled.

The Type Six Shadow
As with many other dimensions of the Type Six personality, what is
relegated to the Shadow varies according to what subtype we are talking
about and the preferred strategy of the different subtypes for dealing with
fear and anxiety.
Generally, however, Sixes focus on their fear and thinking and worry
about how to handle threats, which may leave their own courage, faith,

power, and self-confidence in their Shadow. Being preoccupied with
imagining what might go wrong as a way of exercising control in the world
means they don’t always recognize their own authority, strength, and
capability when it comes to handling problems. (This is especially true of
Self-Preservation Sixes.)
Even the counterphobic Sexual Six—who may not be aware of feeling
fearful and who takes refuge from anxiety in strength—may only look
confident and courageous. Naranjo says that the “courage” of this Six may
be the courage of “having a weapon,” not a deep sense of confidence that
things will be okay. With the Sexual Six, vulnerability and fearfulness may
be in their Shadow because of their need to appear intimidating and strong.
This is in contrast to the Self-Preservation Six, who gets caught up in selfdoubt and consciously feels very vulnerable, and so may have blind spots
with regard to his power, self-confidence, or aggression. Social Sixes focus
consciously on obedience to an impersonal authority, such that a healthy
sense of doubt and ambivalence may become blind spots.
Living primarily in their heads and relying on thinking and analysis as a
first line of defense may mean that for some Sixes, many emotions, along
with their capacity for “gut knowing,” can be part of their Shadow. Their
habit of trying to think their way through problems by relying on logic and
rationality can mean that they don’t own their emotional truth and gut (or
instinctual) “wisdom.” Self-Preservation Sixes may avoid being aware of
their more aggressive emotions; Social Sixes may not live from their
uncertain or sentimental feelings; and Sexual Sixes may have their more
tender emotions in their Shadow.
Naturally skeptical, Sixes may also not be very conscious of their internal
capacity for trust and faith, preferring instead to consciously doubt, test, and
question what people say as a protection against putting faith in the wrong
person or idea.
Whatever a Six projects onto others may be, by definition, unconscious
and thus part of the Shadow. Often, Sixes project their power onto others
instead of owning it themselves. Naranjo explains that self-accusation and
guilt are key features of the Type Six personality in that the inner habit of
making themselves “bad” (as perhaps they were made to feel bad by
threatening authorities) contributes to the insecurity that motivates their
fear.20 They may act out the effects of this underlying assumption of their
own “badness,” fearing that bad things will happen to them because they

somehow deserve it, without ever realizing the extent to which this kind of
guilt and “self-opposition” drives them.
Sixes also may be blind to the ways in which fear fuels their imagination
of what’s happening. When perceiving danger and risk, Sixes often believe
they are just seeing what’s out there, and assume that whatever fears are
fueling them are realistic and evidence-based. However, they may not fully
see how active their imaginations can be in catastrophizing or seeing threats
that aren’t really there. Similarly, they may not fully see how they get
caught up in feedback loops—how, when their fears cause them to perceive
reality in a particular way, that stimulates more fear, which affects their
perception of what is real and what isn’t.
The Shadow of the Type Six Passion: Doubt in Dante’s
Underworld
Fear (like anger) is a basic human emotional response that is
entirely appropriate in some contexts. So fear as such is not
punished as a separate sin in Dante’s Inferno. But the underworld
does punish the passion of fear in a way that rings true for the
shadow side of the Type Six personality.
The Vestibule (or outer ring) of the Inferno punishes the
compulsive doubters, those too fearful to ever be truly faithful to
anything:
I looked and saw a kind of banner rushing ahead, whirling
with aimless speed as though it would not ever take a stand;
behind it an interminable train of souls pressed on, so many
that I wondered how death could have undone so great a
number…These wretches, who had never truly lived, went
naked, and were stung and stung again by the hornets and
the wasps that circled them.21
The reflexive doubt of the Type Six Shadow is like being caught
between the impulse to risk vulnerability and the sharp fear that
accompanies it. Sixes are forever trapped in the habit of wanting
to trust or act and finding reasons not to. In Dante’s underworld,
this indecision is final. Relentless stings now force these shades to
mindlessly chase a banner, expressing allegiance that stands for

nothing, symbolizing they way they failed to overcome their
doubt and take a stand in life.

The Three Kinds of Sixes:
The Type Six Subtypes
EACH OF THE THREE SIX SUBTYPES expresses a different approach to dealing
with the passion of fear and related anxieties. Self-Preservation Sixes feel a
need for protection and so deal with fear by making connections with
people. Social Sixes cope with a social fear that makes them afraid of doing
the wrong thing in the eyes of authorities by consulting rules and reference
points. And Sexual Sixes deal with fear by denying their vulnerability and
combating fear from a position of strength.
Naranjo observes that the variance between the three subtype characters
is particularly noticeable in Type Six. In fact, he states that in Sixes more
than in any other type, it is “difficult to speak of a single character.”22
While all three Sixes share an early history of having to deal with anxiety,
the Self-Preservation Six copes with it through a “desire to form reciprocal
protection alliances,” the Social Six through the “wish to find an answer to
the problems of life through reason or ideology or other authoritative
standards,” and the Sexual Six “through a wish to be bigger and
intimidating to others.”23 As a result of the dominance of the three different
instincts and their corresponding ways of dealing with fear, the three Six
subtype personalities have different “energetic temperatures:” SelfPreservation Sixes are warm, Social Sixes are cool, and Sexual Sixes are
hot.

The Self-Preservation Six: “Warmth”
In the Self-Preservation Six personality, fear manifests as insecurity. SelfPreservation Sixes have a fear related to survival—a fear of not being
protected that fuels a driving need for protection through friendship and
other kinds of alliances with others. This is the most phobic of the three Six
subtypes; this is the Six subtype who feels fear the most.
Perceiving the world as dangerous, Self-Preservation Sixes seek friendly
connections and alliances, and to do this they endeavor to be friendly,
trustworthy, and supportive—as good allies are supposed to be. As Naranjo
clarifies, “not trusting themselves enough, they feel alone and incapable

without outside support.”24 Self-Preservation Sixes want to feel the
embrace of the family, to be in a warm, protected place where there are no
enemies. They search for an “idealized other” for protection, and they can
have issues that look like separation anxiety. Like a child who needs to hold
on to the mother, these Sixes don’t feel confident in defending their own
self-interests and survival.
These Sixes seek to escape anxiety by seeking the security of protection;
therefore, they become dependent on others. They have a passion for
compensating for the fear of separation, which manifests as a warm and
friendly temperament. Their driving need is therefore for something like
(neurotic) friendship or warmth, which makes this subtype the warmest of
the Sixes. They tend to be in a good mood and have a generally pleasant
disposition. They look for a bond of intimacy and trust in their
relationships, and they fear disappointing others, especially those who are
closest to them. Being warm is their way of getting people to be friendly so
they won’t be attacked.
Self-Preservation Sixes fear anger, aggression, provocation, and
confrontation. Being afraid of other people’s aggression means they can’t
let their own aggression out. As Naranjo explains in describing this Six,
making people like you means being good, and being good means not being
angry. Naranjo asserts that “the taboo on aggression that results from the
needs of dependency weakens this Six in the face of others’ aggression and
contributes to their insecurity and their need for external support.”25
There is a lot of hesitation, indecision, and uncertainty in the SelfPreservation Six personality. These Sixes ask many questions, but they
don’t answer any. They doubt themselves, and they doubt their doubt.26
Feeling uncertain, and unable to find a satisfying sense of certainty, SelfPreservation Sixes have a difficult time making decisions. They see the
world in terms of ambiguity—as “gray” rather than “black and white.”
People with this subtype can’t dispel their sense of doubt and uncertainty.
Because of their fundamental sense of insecurity and their habit of
questioning and doubting, they never feel ready or able. They also feel a lot
of blame and guilt, even assuming or feeling the blame of others.
There are two realities for Self-Preservation Sixes: an external reality of
warmth, tenderness, serenity, and peacefulness, and an inner reality of fear,
guilt, anguish, and torment. Their head and heart are separated—they feel
heart-centered on the outside, but are head-centered internally.

As the most phobic of the three Sixes, the avoidant Self-Preservation
subtype equates love with protection, and in looking for love they search for
a source of security to compensate for an inner sense of insecurity. This Six
wants to find a strong person to lean on, and they may be excessively
friendly and giving as a way of preventing an attack from outside. In order
to feel the strength they are lacking, the Self-Preservation Six attracts the
affections or protection of somebody strong—the more forceful presence of
another helps them to feel safer.
Self-Preservation Sixes can thus look like Type Twos in that they are
warm and friendly and put a lot of energy and attention into the
development of relationships with others. Like Type Twos, these Sixes tend
to lead with affection and accommodate others as a way of forging
connections—but unlike Twos, their deepest motivation is to create safety,
not to gain approval in support of pride.
Linda, a Self-Preservation Six, speaks:
I live in a small community governed by a homeowners’
association. Initially, I was comforted that we could come
together as a group to create guidelines and rules that I assumed
would make for less conflict between neighbors and more
security. I made it a point to meet and establish a comfortable
relationship with each of them. I volunteered to be on the board,
and even offered to lend my professional expertise to work with
the entire group on our community values and vision.
Over time, though, I saw that compliance to the governing
principles was lax and enforcement was selective or nonexistent.
Four years ago a situation arose in which my rights were being
violated by a neighbor, and for reasons unbeknownst to me, the
board sided with the neighbor. In one fatal stroke my carefully
nurtured allies became dangerous enemies, rendering me
defenseless because of my fear of invoking further attack should I
try to defend myself or my interests.
My shock and anger at their betrayal quickly devolved into a
sense of guilt, shame, and anxiety so profound that I could no
longer attend homeowner meetings, speak with my neighbors, or
even walk around the block because of my fear of being

“attacked.” I became obsessed with phantom conversations in my
mind, composing just the right speech that would win them back
or what I would say or do to these people for revenge, if only I
had the courage to do so. On the outside, I try to act friendly, but
on the inside I feel fearful and contemptuous. This dissonance is
exhausting. All I want to do now is sell the house and escape from
this place and these people.

The Social Six: “Duty”
Lacking either trust in themselves (like the Sexual Six) or other people (like
the Self-Preservation Six), Social Sixes deal with the passion of fear and its
related anxiety by relying on abstract reason or a specific ideology as an
impersonal frame of reference. They find safety by relying on authorities, or
on the “authority” of reason, rules, and rational thinking.
The name given to this type by Ichazo is “Duty,” which doesn’t mean
they “do their duty” (though they often do) as much as it means that they
focus on “what their duty is.” In coping with anxiety, the Social Six
consults the guidelines associated with whatever authority they adhere to.
They focus on knowing what the benchmark is and on obeying the rules of
the game. They feel a need to know all the points of reference—what the
party line is, who the good guys are, and who the bad guys are.
Consciously or unconsciously, Social Sixes fear the disapproval of
authorities and believe the way to be safe is to do the right thing as
determined by an authority. And knowing what the right thing is means
having clear rules that tell you how you should think and act. This
orientation has the effect of developing the philosophical mind, because
when you don’t know how you should live—when you don’t trust your
intuition or your human sense of life to guide you—you have to become
very intellectual. But this sense of duty also becomes a way to structure
your life: someone gives you the rules, and you follow them.
Archetypally, the guidelines of whatever system a Social Six follows
become a kind of replacement authority for the first authority—the parent,
usually the father. While they may have rebelled against or been
disappointed by their actual father, they look for a good authority in life as a
way of finding security. Total submission and obedience to authority (and
the rules associated with authority) helps them feel safe in the world.
Naranjo points out, however, that choosing the wrong authority can be a

problem for Social Sixes: “Instead of believing in the person who is right,
they tend to believe in people who speak as if they were right, and who
have the special gift of making themselves believed.”27
The Social Six typically represents a mixture of phobic and
counterphobic expressions. This Six is a cooler character than the SelfPreservation Six. They find safety in being precise about how one should
conduct oneself. They have a lot of anticipatory anxiety—they believe that
everything will go wrong. So they rely on precision in following the rules
as a way of coping with their anxiety. They feel most secure when they
have clear minds and when things are in clear categories. Social Sixes are
good Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, dedicated to adhering to the group code
and to a competent way of doing things based on that code.
The Social Six is a stronger character than the Self-Preservation Six, and
this greater strength has to do with having more certainty than uncertainty.
The Self-Preservation Six is an insecure person—they hesitate because they
are not sure. The Social Six is someone who, in defense against the
insecurity associated with not being sure, becomes too sure. They can—in
the extreme—become “true believers” or fanatics. In the counterphobic
Sexual Six, fear is turned into its opposite when the person adopts a stance
of strength, but in the Social Six, “it is not fear that is turned into an
opposite, but doubting.”28
The Social Six can also be very idealistic, structuring life through an
adherence to high ideals. This is a character who holds tight to ideologies
and a particular view of things as a way of feeling safe.
In contrast to the Self-Preservation Six, who gets stuck in ambivalence
and can’t make decisions, Social Sixes have an intolerance of ambiguity.
They fear ambivalence and have little tolerance of uncertainty, because to
them, uncertainty equals anxiety. As a result, they have a love of precision
and see things more in terms of black and white than gray.
The Social Six is also a bit of a legalistic character; they have the mind of
a lawgiver, and they like clear categories. Culturally, the Germans provide a
good example of this archetype in that they like precision, order, and
efficiency. Social Sixes have a strong sense of duty, they idealize authority,
and they display a generalized dutifulness—an obedience to law, a devotion
to fulfilling responsibilities as defined by external authority, a tendency to
follow rules and to value documents and institutions, and a kind of rigidity
and organization.

Social Sixes both fear making a mistake and long for certainties: a person
with this subtype “wants to be talked to in a certain manner so that he or she
may feel that the speaker knows, the speaker is right.”29 They have a highly
intellectual orientation, and their patterns of thinking can take the form of
diagrams and flowcharts.
These Sixes are not very spontaneous; they live a more scripted life. As a
result of being so much in their heads, they don’t have very much contact
with their instincts or their intuition. They tend to be shy and have little
ability to socialize or to be moved or touched by something or someone.
They may feel uncomfortable with experiences related to unrestricted
animal instincts or sexuality.
Social Sixes can tend to be controlling, impatient, judgmental, and selfcritical. They demand a lot of themselves, and may insist on everything
being done according to their codes and viewpoints. Others may perceive
Social Sixes as cold or cool, as they can be very formal in the things they
do.
Individuals with this subtype can have many characteristics in common
with Type Ones, especially Self-Preservation Ones. Like Ones, they follow
rules and tend to be controlled, critical, hardworking, punctual, precise, and
responsible. However, while Ones are guided in a confident way by a sense
of their own internal standards, Sixes’ fear of making a mistake has more to
do with getting in trouble with an external authority.
The love of precision and the efficiency of this Social Six subtype can
also make them resemble Type Threes; however, the main motivation of
this Six is to avoid anxiety by finding a sense of authority in reference
points, not to accomplish goals and look good through efficiency.
A. H., a Social Six, speaks:
Some of my happiest moments as an adult have come after
aligning myself with a system for how to live. When I was thirty, I
discovered the work of Ken Wilber and found myself ease into a
sense of clarity and peace because everything finally made sense.
All my confusion about how different things related to each other
suddenly dissolved. Here was a system I could trust. The same
thing happened a few years ago, when I was shocked to find that
my body fat percentage was nearly 25 percent. I immediately

researched how to improve this. Once I found a system of eating
and exercising that seemed trustworthy, I latched on to it. In both
cases, it wasn’t just that I had rules to follow; it was that the rules
actually brought me in touch with a sense of purpose and comfort.
Now, the other side of the story is that I have an internal set of
rules about how to stay physically safe, and I get upset when
other people don’t follow them. I can’t tell you how many times
I’ve said to my wife, “Watch his head!” while she carried my
infant son through a doorway. In such situations, my body’s threat
response goes into high gear. Not only do I perceive danger—I
can see that someone isn’t following the rules on how to avoid it.
That’s when the cool guy can get mean and even cold.

The Sexual Six: “Strength/Beauty” (Countertype)
The countertype of the Type Six subtypes, the Sexual Six is the most
counterphobic Six, the one who turns against the passion of fear by
assuming a stance of strength and intimidation. Instead of actively feeling
fearful, these Sixes have an inner belief that when you are afraid, the best
defense is a good offense. As Naranjo explains, anxiety in this Six is
allayed by skill and readiness in the face of a possible attack. They often
appear bold and even fierce. They go against danger assertively, and even
aggressively, as a way of denying and coping with their (often unconscious)
fear.
Through denying their feelings of fear to one extent or another, Sexual
Sixes go against danger from a position of strength; therefore, they have a
passion for searching for or securing a position of strength. And it’s not just
a strong character they seek, but the kind of strength that makes somebody
else afraid—they want to assume a powerful enough stance to hold the
enemy at a distance. These Sixes display a forcefulness that comes from not
wanting to be weak, and they don’t allow for weakness in themselves.
Sexual Sixes’ strength is often physical. They may develop this physical
strength through sports or exercise that serve to build muscles and make
them feel strong in their bodies. They tend to have marked control over
their bodies as a way of cultivating a sense of inner strength to guard
against feeling the chaotic emotions associated with the release of rage or
other impulses.

These Sixes also seek to be strong in terms of endurance; they seek to
feel tough in the face of fatigue, repression, humiliation, and pain. (In this
aspect, they may resemble the Self-Preservation Four.) For the Sexual Six,
strength is often directly connected to an illusion of independence and a
sense of being able to remain “unscathed” by trouble. They may also have a
feeling of being somehow “bad” inside, and their strength protects them
from their own inner attacks on themselves.
Sexual Sixes have a need not just for strength but for intimidation. As
Naranjo suggests, this expression of intimidation is very much the essence
of the character: if they appear strong, they won’t be attacked. While
Naranjo explains that Ichazo’s title for this subtype, “Strength/Beauty,”
originally meant “strength” in men and “beauty” in women, it may also be
true that being beautiful is a source of strength in both male and female
Sexual Sixes.
These characters walk around with the idea that anyone can become
dangerous, so they do everything they can to not feel cheated, manipulated,
taken advantage of, or attacked. If you are someone who thinks and feels
this way, you need to be prepared to be strong and mount a resistance.
That’s why Sexual Sixes not only develop strength but also intimidation—
in the service of resistance, of being prepared to scare someone off, rebel, or
be contrary.
Sexual Sixes give off the impression that they could get violent with
anybody at any time, but that doesn’t mean that they have no fear. It is
precisely out of a sense of fear that their anticipation of an attack comes—
there is a somewhat paranoid imagining of danger, a belief that anyone can
turn into a threat. However, these Sixes usually do not look afraid; their
visible character could hardly be called “fearful” from the outside.
In contrast to the Self-Preservation Six, who backs away from threats, the
counterphobic Sexual Six tends to move toward risky situations, feeling a
sense of safety in actually confronting danger rather than hiding from it or
avoiding it. They convince themselves (and others) that they are not victims
of fear; they are convinced that fear is an emotion that should be eliminated
systematically.
Despite being aggressive as part of their effort to intimidate through
strength, Sexual Sixes tend not to acknowledge their aggressive side and
may not be aware of it—or at least of the intensity of it. Their aggression is
expressed mostly in the social arena and not as much in their private lives,

as they will usually have needed to develop some level of trust with those
they are close to. They also tend to separate their emotions: aggression is
disconnected from fear, and sex is disconnected from feelings of love and
intimacy.
The fact that these Sixes regularly move against danger (or perceived
danger) can, at times, give them the appearance of a rebel, a daredevil, a
risk-taker, an adrenaline junkie, or a troublemaker. In some cases, Sexual
Sixes may be prone to megalomania or having a “hero complex.” In their
own way, they seek to be “good guys” to avoid being punished. They may
have the illusion that they are spontaneous, but they tend not to be.
Sexual Sixes tend to be very contrarian: they always have an argument at
hand to refute and contradict an opinion. Instead of thinking in terms of
“best-case” or “worst-case” scenarios, they think in terms of contrarian
scenarios—if the trend is for others to focus on the worst, they will focus on
the best; but if everyone is focusing on the best, they will assert the worst.
Although they may seem certain in their assertiveness, Sexual Sixes may
hold doubt in their minds for a long time—doubting which road to take and
so getting caught between choices. They often believe that there is only one
truth, and they prefer concrete and pragmatic ideologies because they feel
safe and allow control of the world. They fear making an error, and the
consequences of doing so.
The Sexual Six can look like a Type Eight because both types can appear
intimidating, strong, and powerful. However, in contrast to the Eight, who
tends to be fearless, the Sexual Six is motivated by an underlying fear, even
when they don’t consciously feel it or show it. Also, while Eights like to
create order, Sexual Sixes often like to disrupt order by stirring up trouble.
Sexual Sixes can also look like Threes in that they are action-oriented, fastmoving, assertive, and hardworking. They differ from Threes, however, in
that they have more paranoid fantasies and their assertiveness has its basis
in fear rather than in the need to achieve and accomplish goals in the
service of looking good.
Richard, a Sexual Six, speaks:
For me the world is a dangerous place and as a result I maintain
a constant vigilance. Scanning and looking for inconsistencies in

people and the world around me is an ongoing and never-ending
task. Dealing with the outside world is exhausting as a result.
Social occasions are especially taxing. On a recent night out with
my wife, we went to a party where there were twenty to thirty
other couples in attendance. Everyone was in a fun and festive
mood…including myself. However, I quickly noticed that while my
wife was easily approached and engaged by the new people
around us, I, on the other hand, seemed to maintain a three-foot
“No Fly Zone” around me for at least the first hour.
I’ve realized that my automatic and unconscious approach to
dealing with uncertain and potentially threatening situations is to
present myself as a potential threat. I don’t literally threaten
people, of course; it’s more of an energy, or an aura, I create
around myself without always knowing I’m doing it. I often
wonder how others experience me when I’m in that mode:
reserved and somewhat stoic, critical and watchful, and
physically intense. From the inside, I have the sense that I’m
ready to spring into action at a moment’s notice. Recently,
through therapy, I’ve realized how important it has been for me to
squash fear (and even potential hints of fear) aggressively,
assertively, and with prejudice.

“The Work” for Type Six:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS SIXES WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of intensifying their fear (through their
attempts to reduce it) by doing the following: seeking to embody faith and
courage, becoming aware of how they create self-fulfilling prophecies,
learning to trust themselves (and others) more, and owning their power and
authority instead of projecting it out onto others.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Sixes, this process involves observing the ways they cope
with fear and anxiety; exploring the ways they behave when they are scared

(and the motives behind their behavior); and making active efforts to
develop trust, faith, and courage.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Sixes can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Sixes take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Trying to find a sense of control and security in a dangerous world by watching, doubting, testing,
and questioning

Observe your tendency to scan for danger and to be hypervigilant. How
does this manifest in you in terms of your behavior, your energy, and the
ways in which you relate to others? What kinds of things are you watching
out for? How might this function as a stress-inducing way of “looking for
trouble” instead of helping you to relax and feel safe? Observe your
doubting mind in action and notice the patterns of thinking involved. Note
your habit of questioning yourself and others. What does it help you to do?
How might it also hinder you? Notice the ways you might test other people.
Does this tendency help clarify things for you, or does it put up barriers that
prevent you from connecting with others? Examine your thinking to see if
you get caught up in circular patterns and explore why it may feel hard to
escape this kind of mental loop.
Projecting fear, anxiety, and power out onto others, especially authorities

Projection may be a difficult activity to witness in yourself, but try to catch
yourself in the act of disowning your fears and your power. When might
you imagine that your fear is caused by an outside source? In other words,
when do you look for people and situations to which to attach your anxiety
so that you may convince yourself they are somehow to blame instead of
owning your feelings and the reasons behind them? Are you dwelling on

thoughts of someone as the cause of your problems and thinking about what
they are doing that’s bad as a way of distracting yourself from the anxiety
inside you? Pay close attention to how you feel, think, and relate to
authority figures. What might you be projecting onto them—both in terms
of your fears and your disowned power—and how might these projections
be influencing your perceptions and what is happening?
Acting out fear in different ways instead of owning it, being with it, and managing it

When we remain unconscious to the emotions that drive our behavior, we
tend to “act out” those emotions in order to avoid feeling things that may be
hard to feel. This can get us in trouble because we remain unaware of the
true motives behind the way we are seeing and handling things. Sixes may
act from fear when they overthink situations, create worst-case scenarios,
build negative fantasies about others’ bad intentions, become indecisive and
unable to take action, or procrastinate. If you are a Six, it will be important
for you to consciously notice how you see fear and anxiety motivating your
behavior and look for signs that you may be acting out your fear
unconsciously rather than fully experiencing it. Note if you feel fear and
anxiety and what forms it takes. Notice also if you don’t feel much fear or
anxiety, as that may indicate that you are expressing it in other ways,
through inhibitions, avoidance, imaginative or paranoid fantasies,
projections, overanalysis, or overintellectualization.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Sixes observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns better. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Sixes can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider, to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns.

How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Sixes cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how they
operate as coping strategies, Sixes have the opportunity to become more
aware of how their main strategies for coping with fear and anxiety operate
in their life to help them try to find a sense of security. If Sixes can tell the
story of their early life and understand how and why they developed their
habitual ways of coping with fear, they can have more compassion for
themselves. Examining the habitual patterns that help them exert control as
a way to meet fear can help Sixes gain insight into how tendencies like
hypervigilance, doubt, overanalysis, and paranoia have developed to
support the specific coping strategies they use to manage fear, risk, and
threat.
What painful emotions are the Type Six patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic
anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. Ironically, the strategies Sixes use to try to gain some
control in a scary world may both mask deeper feelings of fear and anxiety
and exacerbate them, as these strategies keep Sixes focused on threats but
often don’t succeed in fending them off, especially as habits like
questioning and doubting become circular traps. Depending on the Six’s
subtype, some of the typical Six patterns may also serve as protection
against feelings of anger, sadness, guilt, or loneliness. Self-Preservation
Sixes in particular may feel a taboo on their own aggression, and their
defensive habits may reinforce their inability to access anger. Their focus
on fear may also be a way to avoid feelings of guilt or shame, which Sixes
tend to experience on a deeper level as a result of having felt early on that
they were not worth being protected.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Six patterns operate in me now?

By reflecting on how these patterns operate, the three kinds of Sixes can
begin to have a greater awareness of how their defensive patterns happen in
everyday life—and in the present moment. If they can consciously catch

themselves in the act of getting stuck in doubt, questioning, mistrust, or
suspicion as a way to feel safe, they can wake up to the deeper motivations
that drive them in their sometimes self-defeating attempts to reduce risk and
manage threat. It can be eye-opening for Sixes to see how they may increase
their sense of insecurity through their efforts to cope with problems and
dangers. By understanding exactly what is motivating them to enact
recurring patterns like being hypervigilant, contrarian, rebellious, and even
paranoid, they can gain a great deal of useful and actionable selfknowledge.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Sixes keep themselves from seeing?

To really increase their self-understanding, it will be important for Sixes to
become more aware of what they don’t see when their personality
programming is driving the show. While Sixes’ blind spots will vary
according to subtype, it will help Sixes to grow if they can begin to develop
more consciousness around the areas of their experience their defenses may
keep hidden, like the true nature and sources of their fear, anxiety, and
aggression. Sixes tend to keep themselves from seeing the extent of their
fear and the reasons behind it, as it could intensify their anxieties. Sixes that
tend to respond to their underlying fear with counterphobic patterns may be
blind to their more vulnerable feelings and fears; conversely, more phobic
Sixes will actively avoid seeing and owning their aggression, power, and
authority. Since Sixes tend to project their power onto others, it can help
them to see and own the power and self-confidence they have
unconsciously disowned.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

Because of the potentially circular nature of doubt, questioning, selfaccusation, and insecurity, Sixes’ efforts to cope with fear and anxiety are
often self-defeating. If you can’t help but doubt and question everything out
of a need to find some safety in certainty, and you even doubt your own
doubt, it may be hard to stop the questioning and actually locate a solid
sense of something you can be sure of. Alternatively, Sixes who become too
certain as a way of combating the insecurity of ambiguity and doubt may
ally themselves too quickly, too completely, or too rigidly with the wrong
authority. Being too uncertain and weak, too easily seduced by an

authoritative system or person, or too aggressive and intimidating as a way
to ward off threats are all patterns that can create more problems than they
solve. Projecting fears onto others and creating mental pictures of fearful
scenarios can undermine the security Sixes are trying to find in ways that
may lead to self-fulfilling prophecies.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to think, feel, and act with more choice and
awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Sixes about “what to do”
after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation into
their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns of your core type
described above in the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the
Enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to
study your passion (or “Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite,
the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Six Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Trying to find a sense of control and security in a dangerous world
by watching, doubting, testing, and questioning
Recognize that uncertainty is an inevitable part of life. Just as Type Ones benefit from

accepting that imperfection is inherent in human life, Sixes can help
themselves by acknowledging that uncertainty is a part of life. Sixes have
very facile analytical minds, so it will be impossible or nearly impossible to
eradicate all uncertainty—as Sixes well know, the nature of reality is also
radically contingent upon circumstances, so efforts to achieve an ideal of
certainty are most likely futile.

Instead of allowing yourself to get caught up in a relentless cycle of
questioning as you look for proof that something is true, remember that the
search itself lets you know that you are afraid. Instead of all the continual
mental testing, take yourself out of your head and watch what you are doing
from a distance. Look into your heart to ask yourself what you are feeling
and what you need emotionally. Listen to what your gut is telling you.
Remind yourself that the search for certainty won’t get you anywhere, so
it’s important to consciously shift your attention away from that futile
vortex.
Remember that we tend to find what we seek. In some ways, the habit of vigilantly

watching for signs of danger may lead you to see danger everywhere. To the
extent that we create our own reality through the lens we use for looking at
the world, Sixes may find trouble because they are looking for it. They may
see the world in terms of problems because their minds habitually seek
problems to fix. Therefore, it can be important for Sixes to notice when they
are fixated on looking for threats and problems and consciously shift their
attention to the more positive data in life. While Sixes tend to see
themselves as realists, others can perceive them as pessimists because their
pattern of looking for problems to solve can make them seem like they are
focusing on only what’s negative. Instead of seeing the glass as half-empty
(or looking for the holes in the glass), try seeing the glass as half-full.
Get out of your head and into your body.

Sixes can be very head-based and
intellectual. They generate fear and anxiety through their tendency to think,
imagine the worst, and plan for what to do if the worst happens. Fear lives
in the Six’s head as anticipation of the negative, even if they frame this kind
of proactive expectation as a good thing. So, one way to work against all
that preparatory thinking and the anxiety and negative cycles it can spawn
is to get out of your head altogether and into your body. Physical exercise
can help you to ground your awareness in a “present moment” experience
of your bodily self, shifting you out of the default mode of mental activity
that keeps you stuck. Make a point of exercising regularly, consciously
breathing from your belly, and putting your attention in your gut center as a
way of reminding yourself that you need to visit other parts of your self in
order to balance out all that thinking.

Projecting fear, anxiety, and power out onto others, especially
authorities
Learn to discern the difference between intuition and projection. Sixes are both naturally

intuitive and habitual projectors, so it is important for them to learn to
discern the difference between information based on inner knowing versus
information based on what they disown and attribute to others. Sixes project
as a way of separating from, and defensively relating to, a threatening
element or feeling. When they confuse projection for intuition, they may
think they know what someone else is doing or saying, but they really don’t.
By unconsciously blaming others for their own feelings, they remain
unaware of their own blind spots and disowned emotions and relate to
others in potentially paranoid or alienating ways. So it will be important for
Sixes to continually check in and ask themselves, “Is this something I
intuitively know or something I am projecting?” Then they will need to
examine the evidence as objectively as they can—and ask trusted others for
input on reading the evidence if it still seems difficult to decide. If you are a
Six and you think someone is mad at you or judging you, ask them directly
before you make up a whole story about it.
Consciously claim whatever you are projecting. Sixes can work against projecting fear,

power, and other things onto people by noticing the ideas they have about
others and looking to see how they might reflect their own disowned
emotions, experiences, and qualities. If you are a Six and you have a
heightened sense of judgment, anxiety, or upset toward someone else,
inspect the stories you are making up about what they are doing. Explore
why you may be projecting onto them as a way of explaining why they are
dangerous and you are innocent. Alternatively, notice when you are
projecting your power onto someone and viewing yourself as powerless;
consider that you may be underestimating your own strength as a way of
finding a hero or a threat outside yourself.
Work to be more aware of your authority issues. As Naranjo points out, all three of the

Type Six personalities have authority issues—they both want and mistrust
authorities, both love and hate them. So, hierarchical and authority
relationships are important areas for Sixes to develop a greater level of
awareness of their defensive habits. They will want to pay close attention to

the feelings and thoughts that get stirred up in their relationships with the
authorities in their lives, and either try to trust more (when the evidence
warrants it) or own their own independence, power, and wisdom. It can help
Sixes along their path of conscious growth toward their more naturally
powerful “oak tree-Self” if they can refrain from displaying an overreliance
on an outside authority as a compensation for their own insecurity and own
their own power, vulnerability, and the power that comes from being able to
be vulnerable.

Acting out fear in different ways instead of owning it, being with it,
and consciously managing it
Recognize “fight,” “flight,” and “freeze” as fear reactions. If you learn to see your

specific reactions to fear when they arise, you can develop a clearer sense
of when you feel afraid, what you are inclined to do in reaction to fear, and
how you can have more conscious choice about how you respond when you
get afraid. If you can create more clarity, space, and compassion for
yourself around the specific ways in which fear shows up for you, you will
have a much easier time navigating fearful experiences with consciousness.
Whether you run away and hide, get paralyzed by overthinking or
overreliance on rules, or rebel, it pays to become more and more conscious
of how fear shows up in your experience, and to develop an ability to read
the clues to know exactly how fear is driving your thoughts, feelings, and
actions.
Learn to feel, manage, and let go of fear. Working with fear is a part of growth work

for Sixes. Observing and reflecting on how your fear arises (or gets
avoided) and on your relationship to fear and its consequences is key in
watching how your personality operates. When feeling fearful, check out
the evidence. What is really (objectively) happening? It will be important
for you to honestly evaluate whether your concerns are misplaced or
invented rather than a true representation of reality. As you learn to
recognize how fear arises, you can more consciously examine it, explore it,
modulate it, or calm it.
Some Sixes don’t relate to having a prominent experience of fear. These
Sixes may be more conscious of angry feelings or the ways in which they
act from fear without understanding that it’s fear that drives them. They

may be working hard on something, or anxious about something, or moving
aggressively on something, without being clear what emotions are driving
their actions. In these kinds of situations, it will be important for Sixes to
look underneath any active efforts, aggression, or defiant feelings they are
having that may signal underlying fears they are avoiding by acting against
them, and to work to understand and manage these responses.
Have more faith in response to fear. Just as fear is an anticipatory feeling that

something will go wrong, faith is the ability to let go of fear and trust that
things will generally be okay. If, as a Six, you can get out of your head and
into your gut or your heart, you can consciously shift your attention away
from mental analysis—get out of a thinking mode and into emotions and
gut knowing, which provide other kinds of data and so can help you break
your reliance on the intellectual search for certainty as a way of selfsoothing.

The Inner Flow for Type Six:
Using the Arrow Lines to Chart Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
defines one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its
“growth–(through)-stress” point, and its “child–heart-(security)” point map
one kind of growth path described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow
lines can be seen to suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “stress–growth” point ahead
represents specific challenges the nature of our core point
personality places in front of us.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that had to be disowned must be consciously acknowledged so
that we can move forward and not be held back by unfinished

business from the past. This “child–heart” point represents
qualities of security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally
fall back into as a comfort in times of stress or security, and
now must reintegrate consciously.

Type Six Moving Forward to Type Three:
Consciously Using the Three “Stress–Growth” Point for
Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Sixes brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Three: developing an ability to use
goals and relationships as supports to overcome fear, take action, and
achieve results. In extremely stressful situations, Sixes may defensively act
out the “low side” of Three by engaging in frantic action or anxious
striving. However, by engaging the Three Point in a conscious way and
seeking to embody the higher Type Three qualities of productivity, honesty,
and hope, Sixes can work against the fears that hold them back. In light of
their tendencies to become paralyzed by fearfulness and overanalysis or
throw themselves into nervous hard work, Sixes can use the Three Point to
shift their attention away from their fears and anxieties and focus instead on
the worthiness of their goals, the positive aspects connected to impressing
others with their good work, and sincere pride in achievement. As getting
stuck in fear can, in the extreme, threaten Sixes’ well-being, it serves them
to learn to use the natural motivation Threes feel toward forward movement
and the accomplishment of goals to counteract their habit of getting caught
up in inaction or indecisiveness.

The Six working consciously in this way can make ready use of the tools
healthy Type Threes use: self-confidence, an ability to manage feelings, and
dedication to results. The high side of the Three stance has its basis in
honest self-expression, the enjoyment of activity in the service of making
things happen in effective ways, and the hopeful expectation that they will
be rewarded for their sincere efforts. These Three aspects can serve to
balance out Sixes’ preoccupation with what might go wrong, which can
weaken their ability to act in the world. By focusing on realizing the higher
capacities associated with Type Threes—actively focusing on the drive,
industriousness, hopeful outlook, and healthy desire for recognition of the
Three Point—Sixes can counter their tendency to undermine themselves
through insecurity, doubt, and the fear of attracting attention and becoming
a target. Instead of expending energy scanning the outside world for danger
or battling internal anxieties, they can invest their energies in efforts that
support their ability to express themselves in the world, balance their fear
and doubt with hope and confidence, and contribute productively to society
in active ways.

Type Six Moving Back to Type Nine: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Sixes calls for them to reclaim their ability to
relax in their connections with others and go with the flow of life without
having to worry about threats in the environment or something bad
happening. Sixes may not have been able to find inner support through
connections with others because those others may have been threatening,
punishing, unpredictable, absent, or ineffectual. Instead of being able to
blend with others and find a comfortable sense of merger in relationships,
Sixes usually had to move away from others in order to protect themselves
from dangerous people or find safety in independence. Nines often say they
trust others easily, but many Sixes did not have this luxury when they were
young, and so have become stuck in mistrust and suspicion as a survival
strategy.
Sixes may return to their “child–heart” point of Nine as a way of finding
a sense of security through merging with something or someone safe—by
taking refuge in a comfortable place or a connection with another. Sandra
Maitri explains that within every Six is a lazy, Nine-ish child “who just

wants to stay under the covers, doesn’t want to go out and face the world,
wants only to be comfortable and entertained.”30 The Nine Point may then
represent a place of security and comfort that Sixes can retreat to in order to
find safety in a dangerous world—but also a way of getting further stuck in
inactivity when stressed. Sixes who go to the low side of Nine and don’t
consciously integrate the Nine qualities they’ve had to repress in order to
survive may devolve into inaction, inertia, and unconscious merger with
others when their anxieties drive them to withdraw from life and shut down.
Navigated consciously, a Six can use the “move to Nine”
developmentally by establishing a healthy balance between watching out
for dangers to their well-being and being able to relax in the security of
supportive relationships. Sixes can focus on the attributes of this “childheart” point to understand what they may have needed from their early
relationships that they didn’t get enough of, and then seek those things out
as a way of tempering the fear and mistrust they had to develop to survive.
“Moving back to Nine” can thus be a way of recovering their lost sense of
comfort in merging with the agendas and the wills of others, allowing them
to find more comfort in relationships instead of having their guard up. In
this way, Sixes can call on the Nine Point to work through their need to
push away from others to fend off threats and learn to see more deeply into
others’ points of view. If they can reincorporate some of the high-side
aspects of the Nine Point, it can free them from some of the fear-based
habits that inhibit their progress toward the Three Point.
By re-engaging with the natural Type Nine qualities of trust and comfort
with others, Sixes can consciously remind themselves that it’s okay to let
their guard down and relax some of the time. Instead of needing to protect
themselves from being hurt by others by remaining watchful, they can
reclaim their ability to open up to others more and cultivate an appreciation
for others’ perspectives and approaches to life. In this way, Sixes can
balance out their fear of others’ hidden intentions with an ability to find
security in a deeper sense of being and connection with other people.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Fear and Aiming for Courage
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type

Six, the “Vice” (or passion) of the type is fear, and its opposite, the Virtue,
is courage. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to Virtue
conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion functions
and consciously work toward the embodiment of our higher Virtue, the
more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and fixated
patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side or “oak tree–Self.”
As Sixes become more familiar with their experience of fear and develop
their ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work further by
making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to the
passion of fear. In the case of Type Six, the Virtue of courage represents a
state of being that Sixes can attain through consciously manifesting their
higher capacities.
Courage is a way of being that is awake to the dangers inherent in the
world and at the same time able to access a natural sense of confidence in
meeting them. This higher Virtue encompasses our ability to face our
deepest fears and anxieties secure in the knowledge that we have what it
takes to cope with them. Courage also represents the inner support we
provide ourselves such that we can let go of our ego defenses and grow
beyond the narrow, confining (acorn shell) structure of our personalities.
Ichazo defined courage as “the recognition of the individual’s responsibility
for his own existence,” and as the body’s natural movement to preserve
itself.31 Courage doesn’t require thinking or vigilance or aggression; rather,
it comes from a deep source of inner knowing that we can take care of
ourselves.
Embodying courage as a Six means you have the ability to face outside
dangers with confidence, but it also means you have the ability to open up
to and explore your inner territory. As Maitri points out, because of the
powerful pull of unconsciousness (symbolized by the Nine Point), one of
the most difficult things we can do as humans is to commit to getting to
know our inner reality. Courage thus represents the quality we inhabit when
we do whatever it takes to pay attention to what is going on inside us
despite the constant temptation to stay comfortable and avoid whatever pain
and fear we might feel. It is so easy for us to go to sleep to ourselves, and so
hard to stay engaged in the process of knowing ourselves, that we have to
have courage to remain aware and awake to ourselves, especially because
waking up inevitably entails encountering our suffering. Courage means
having the will to know who you really are and who you may become, even

when this leads you through your fears and all the other painful and scary
emotions you had to go to sleep to (and relegate to your Shadow) in order to
survive when you took on your personality in childhood.
All of us feel the inertia of wanting to stay asleep and the fear of putting
down our protective defenses; and all of us must have the courage to try to
stay awake to the deeper pain and fear that we put aside early on. Becoming
more courageous allows Sixes (and all of us) to face our fears and our
suffering head-on such that we can really grow. The Virtue of the Six Point
represents this kind of deeply felt ability to engage more deeply in life with
confidence. The Six virtue of courage thus reflects both a real inner
resource inherent in who we are and a model of what we can develop and
own more consciously as we try to let go of the protective defenses
associated with the conditioned personality. As C. S. Lewis said, “courage
is not simply one of the virtues, but the form of every virtue at its testing
point.”32

Specific Work for the Three Type Six Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
Whatever type you are, the path from observing your passion to finding its
antidote is not exactly the same for each of the subtypes. The path of
conscious self-work has been characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and
grace:” 33 the “grit” of our personality programming, the “grind” of our
efforts to grow, and the “grace” that comes to us when we our work toward
embodying our higher virtue in conscious and positive ways. Each subtype
has to grind, or exert effort, against something slightly different. This
insight is one of the great benefits of understanding the three distinct
subtypes of each of the nine types.
Self-Preservation Sixes can travel the path from fear to courage by saying things

directly instead of being vague; making decisions instead of staying lost in
questioning; and having the fortitude to fulfill their own needs rather than
always looking to others for support and protection. If you are a SelfPreservation Six, you can work toward embodying courage by giving voice
to your aggression in conscious, constructive ways. Take the risk to learn
that you can draw on your own aggression and confidence more actively in
support of yourself. Challenge yourself to break out of the compulsion to
always need to be good and docile, and practice allowing yourself to be

angry. Have the courage to say more clearly what you really think,
especially when you fear others might disapprove. State your opinions and
preferences, not from a place of reactivity under duress, but from a calm
place of confidence that’s more connected to your power and strength. Risk
being “bad,” getting mad, and expressing more of who you are without
apology or doubt. Have the courage to own your power and authority in the
world without needing to project it onto others. Rather than expecting
support from others, own your many positive qualities such that you can be
more confident in yourself. Work to have a more conscious sense of your
strength and strength of purpose, knowing you have the courage to support
yourself in the world in whatever ways you might need to.
Social Sixes can travel the path from fear to courage by forgetting about what

their duty is or isn’t and connecting in a more purposeful way with their
own instincts, their own intuition, and with life in general. If you are a
Social Six, recognize that living from the intellect only gets you so far; your
head is not necessarily the right organ to tell you how to live fully. Allow
yourself to get a little crazy and forget all the rules and reference points.
You can grow toward courage more if you can learn to let go of your system
of thinking, your ideas about what your duty is, and your clear categories,
and develop the ability to become your own authority. Explore the ways in
which you may be making an ideology—or even “rationality” itself—an
impersonal authority that you rely on as a source of support or a parental
surrogate, and take the risk of owning your own power instead. Realize and
become more aware of how you may be compensating for a father figure
who let you down, so you don’t need to draw so heavily on whatever you
are using as a guiding authority in your life. Don’t be guided so much by
your intellectual maps; act more from instinct. Have the courage to pursue
pleasure rather than duty, knowing that connecting to your own power and
satisfaction on all levels is the royal road to manifesting your higher
capacities.
Sexual Sixes can travel the path from fear to courage by learning how to be

more vulnerable. If you are a Sexual Six, you may at times feel courageous,
but don’t mistake aggression and “strength” born of fear for real courage.
As Naranjo says, the courage of the Sexual Six is the courage of having a
weapon. Put down your weapons and learn to tap into your vulnerable

emotions as a source of real strength, real power, and real courage. Notice
how being strong masks your fear and other vulnerable feelings, and work
to get in touch with those instead of always taking refuge in your ability to
squash fear and look strong on the outside. Work toward having the courage
to be able to let your guard down with more people more often. Allow
yourself to feel pleasure without ambivalence and tenderness without
reserve. Notice how the fear of losing your freedom and independence may
lead you to push people away, and work on learning to trust people more
with your more vulnerable feelings. Allow yourself to be guided more by
instinct, intuition, and softer emotions so you can expand the ways in which
you relate to yourself and open yourself up to others. Recognize that you
can be liberated from the fear that keeps you locked inside the hard shell of
your “acorn” self by seeing and accepting that you don’t always have to be
so strong and so vigilant.

Conclusion
THE SIX POINT REPRESENTS the way we guard ourselves from others and the
world out of a need to feel safe. The Six path of growth shows us how to
transform our fear and all its manifestations into the courage and strength of
purpose that allow us to find a greater sense of security within ourselves so
that we can do the work of waking up to all we may become. In each of the
Type Six subtypes we see a specific character who teaches us what is
possible when we can turn our fear into a fully awakened capacity to have
the courage to face what scares us—on the inside and the outside—through
the alchemy of self-observation, self-development, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 7

The Point Five Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
He travels the fastest who travels alone.
—Rudyard Kipling

I have never found a companion that was so companionable as
solitude.
—Henry David Thoreau, Walden

Understanding is a kind of ecstasy.
—Carl Sagan

TYPE FIVE REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who withdraws into
thinking and detaches from feeling as a way of taking refuge in the inner
world. This functions as a way of finding privacy and freedom in a world
that seems intrusive or neglectful or overwhelming. The central drive of this
archetype is to find security by minimizing needs and using resources
economically so that external demands can be limited and controlled. In
Fives, the natural human need for people can be displaced into a thirst for
knowledge, such that internal support comes through information and firm
boundaries instead of social connections.
We see a major characteristic of this archetype in Jung’s concept of
“introversion.” While being introverted, or oriented primarily to the inner
world rather than the outer world, is a general attitude that any of the
personality types may have, “the introvert” as described in Jungian
psychology closely mirrors the defining traits of the Point Five archetype.
According to Jungian analyst and author June Singer, the introvert “is
directed primarily toward an understanding of what he perceives.”1 The
introvert’s attention is focused mainly on “his own being,” which is the
“center of every interest.” People on the outside are important because of
the way they may affect the introvert, and the introvert’s “interest in selfknowledge prevents him from being overpowered by the influence of his

objective surroundings.”2 The introvert “defends himself against external
claims, consolidating his position”3 of security. In Naranjo’s words,
introversion consists of “a movement away from the outer to the inner, and
sensitivity to inner experiences.”4
Type Fives are the prototype for that tendency in all of us to see ourselves
as separate and disconnected from everything else, which causes us to feel
the need to withdraw and hold on to whatever we have to survive.5 We all
identify with our egos, and so can believe that we are isolated individuals
rather than part of an interconnected whole, which leads us to become
attached to the things we think we need to sustain ourselves.
In everyday life, this universal archetype may manifest in the need to
have time alone to rest, or “recharge,” away from the prying eyes and
emotional needs of others. It represents that part of us that would rather
observe than participate and likes to withdraw periodically to a place of
refuge. The Five archetype represents the model for preferring the relative
safety of the intellect to the rigors of social and emotional life and sees
knowledge as the most secure and satisfying form of power. In the face of
conflict, difficulty, or hurt feelings, this stance sees withdrawal and distance
as the best strategy.
In describing the character of the Five archetype, Naranjo points to
psychological theorist Karen Horney’s description of the person who favors
“resignation” as a solution to life’s conflicts, finding inner peace through
maintaining an attitude of “not caring” and declaring himself uninterested
in what is happening in the social world.6 Uncomfortable with moving
toward or against others, this person removes himself from the “inner
battlefield” of love and aggression and gives up the struggle to get what he
needs, resigning himself to settling for less, which potentially initiates an
inner “process of shrinking, of restricting, of curtailing life and growth.”7
Fives have analytical minds and tend to spend a lot of time pursuing their
intellectual interests. They often possess a great deal of knowledge and
expertise in particular areas of study. Because they automatically detach
from emotions, they are highly skilled at performing rational, objective
analyses of issues or situations. This habit also makes them calm in a crisis.
As they appreciate the importance of boundaries in relationships, they value
and respect others’ boundaries and confidences. While they typically don’t
have a large quantity of close friends, they make high-quality, loyal, and
trustworthy friends to the people with whom they do form relationships.

Naturally austere and laconic, Fives are minimalistic and economical in the
things they do, which reflects their concern with making the most of what
resources they have and an ability to get by on limited supplies.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Fives’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel:” they can
isolate themselves from others, feel inhibited in relationships, and be
detached and withdrawn in social situations. While Fives excel at objective
analysis, they can be overly analytical and unemotional to the point that it
can be hard for them to connect with others. They maintain a calm
demeanor, but may not be able to express themselves emotionally. They
may have too many or overly rigid boundaries and seem indifferent or hard
to reach. They may hold themselves back from social interactions out of a
fear of having their energy depleted by social contact. However, if they can
learn to balance their needs for time and space with a greater openness to
others and their own emotions, they can be dedicated friends and partners
who display both a respect for the value of healthy separation and an ability
to engage in wise and thoughtful ways.
The Type Five Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey: Hermes and
Circe
Hermes and Circe each reflect the themes of personality
connected to Type Five. First, each of them guards and uses secret
knowledge. Hermes is the messenger of the gods and charged
with keeping the gods’ secrets. He is also a symbol of boundaries
and the protection they provide. Hermes has the power to bring
what is secret into the light of day if he chooses. (To this day, an
airtight enclosure is said to be “hermetically” sealed and the
process of discerning the meaning behind a literal text is called
“hermeneutics.”)8
Circe means “hawk,” and this name invokes the image of a sharpeyed observer watching from afar. She is a mysterious sorceress
who employs a magic wand and secret potions. She knows the
routes and dangers of the world far better than any human
traveler: “She is that wise being who can offer any seeker
authoritative guidance about the road ahead, if she is so inclined,
and if one knows how to approach her.”9

Circe lives in a palace hidden deep in a wooded glen. She is
surrounded by her collection of animals, but she has no human
companionship. Odysseus’s scouting party interrupts Circe as she
is singing and weaving, and she invites the men in. She soon
transforms them into pigs—the symbol of greedy appetite—
highlighting their human hunger and the craving that leads them
to cling to and gorge themselves on what they have out of a fear
of losing it or going without.
Odysseus follows in search of his men, and, with Hermes’s help
in creating an internal barrier to her potion, he outwits Circe. She
is truly amazed, perhaps for the first time ever:
I’m wonderstruck—you drank my drugs, you’re not
bewitched! Never has any other man withstood my potion,
never, once it’s passed his lips and he has drunk it down. You
have a mind in you no magic can enchant!10
Again, thanks to Hermes, Odysseus knows better than to fall into
Circe’s trap, designed to enclose him in a pig’s greed. He extracts
a promise from Circe that she will never plot against him. The
sorceress makes the oath and restores Odysseus’s crew to human
form. She then begins to reveal the secret knowledge he needs to
continue his journey home through the underground territory of
Hades.
Like the Type Five personality, Hermes and Circe are selfcontained keepers of secret knowledge. They share their guarded
wisdom strategically—and only with those they deem
intellectually worthy. Hermes shows Odysseus how to safeguard
himself against being lured into avarice and Circe rewards him
with abundance when he has shown himself able to resist the trap
of greed, and provides him with guidance into the underworld.
Symbolically, Odysseus has now passed through two different
experiences of fear—fear of large, scary monsters and fear of
being consumed by greed, entrapment, and the need for secrecy—
and now he is ready to enter his underground territory.

The Type Five Personality Structure

FIVES BELONG TO THE “HEAD-BASED” TRIAD associated with the core
emotion of fear and a concern with safety. The personality of each of the
three head types (Five, Six, and Seven) is shaped by its response to the
early experience of fear. The primacy of the use of the head center also
means that these types process information from the outside world mainly
through their mental function—through thinking and analyzing data from
the environment. Sevens avoid fear and anxiety by overcompensating with
the search for stimulating and pleasurable experiences. Sixes become
vigilant, wary, suspicious, and strategic in the face of early fear. Fives,
however, become introverted, walled off from others, and focused on the
protection and economical management of their inner resources. Fives
become adept at avoiding situations in which fear might arise.

Type Five individuals “live in their heads” more than any of the other
Enneagram personality types. They feel more comfortable when they are
thinking and accumulating knowledge, and less comfortable with
emotions.Fives can be very sensitive on the inside, despite their outward
appearance as unsentimental—but they protect this sensitive inner core by
creating thick boundaries that make them impervious to demands placed on
them from the outside world. Fives adapt to their environment and manage
early anxiety by automatically moving away from others, by protecting
their inner lives and withdrawing emotionally from others when necessary.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Five
Fives typically report that they had an early experience of being either
neglected or engulfed by others at a time when they needed other people to
survive. Caregivers were somehow not responsive to the Fives’ needs, and

they learned that they could not achieve anything by force or seduction.11
Because there was nothing to do but to live in privation, they learned to
hold onto their meager resources.
To cope and find protection in a world that hasn’t provided for their
needs and to shield their young sense of self from external threats, Fives
withdraw inside themselves. Finding other people either threatening or
depriving, Fives essentially give up on receiving the sustenance provided by
relationships and find satisfaction in knowledge and intellectual interests
instead. Whereas some types cope by putting attention outward, seeking
comfort through the approval or nurturing of others, Fives resolve to be
self-sufficient and retreat from relationships as a way of saving themselves
and protecting what little inner resources they believe they have.
To avoid needing other people and having to open up to dependent
relationships, Fives minimize their needs and adopt an economical way of
being. This leads to a tendency to withhold limited resources, and to a
“greediness” or hoarding mentality when it comes to time, energy,
information, and material supplies. They often pride themselves on having
an ascetic or minimalistic way of life.
And to the extent that all coping strategies start with the need to adapt to
some sort of deprivation or injury related to the need for love, Fives hold on
to themselves and give up on relationships as a source of love and
support.In this way, the Five coping strategy is based on a scarcity model—
in the face of a lack of what they need, Fives unconsciously decide not to
need very much from the outside and so turn inward, reduce their needs,
and conserve their inner resources. This movement inward and toward
independence as a solution to early deprivation (or intrusion) manifests as a
sense of having a tight hold on one’s inner life as well as a focus on the
economical use of effort, energy, and resources.
This defensive strategy naturally leads Fives to acquire habits through
which they distance themselves from others. This strategy can make Fives
seem aloof and uncaring, but they are much more sensitive on the inside
than they appear. This coping strategy involves not only distancing
themselves from relationships and the need for relationship, but also
separating themselves from their own emotions, in part because feeling
their emotions might move them to reach out to others. In this way, through
their compulsive avoidance of life and of others, they remove themselves
not only from the “interfering world,” but from themselves.12

Thomas, a Social Five, describes his childhood situation and the
development of his coping strategy:
From a very young age I preferred my own company to that of
others. I often read books or entertained myself with fantasy
games. Figuring out how things worked was more important to
me than playing with my siblings or other kids. I actually found it
fun to read encyclopedias and other books that provided large
amounts of information about the world. Although I was regarded
as a clever child by those around me, I found it much easier to be
a loner. The handful of friends I had as a kid were usually the
other “loners” with whom I shared common intellectual interests.
I remember being nine years old and playing “thinking games”
with my best friends. We would analyze the people around us,
classify them according to sets of colors, animals, celebrities, and
general archetypes, and write questionnaires to test out our
theories. We created a secret language for what we wrote so we
could communicate with each other privately through layers of
encoded messages.
I never liked talking about myself and learned that by asking
questions and listening carefully I could deflect other people’s
attention away from my own personal feelings and inner world.
On one level, I felt inadequate, and on another, deeper level, there
were precious layers of my identity that I needed to hold on to as
much as possible. When my parents would take us shopping, I
would always downplay my needs or choose the least expensive
items out of a desire to avoid being a burden on them. I would
hoard the sweets my mother would give to us in a big jar in my
cupboard and not eat them.

The Main Type Five Defense Mechanism: Isolation
Psychologist Nancy McWilliams defines isolation as a defense mechanism in
which people “deal with anxieties and other painful states of mind…by
isolating feeling from knowing.”13 When using isolation as a defense, a
person unconsciously separates out the emotion connected to an idea from
the idea itself. Fives feel more comfortable with thoughts than emotions, so

Fives automatically focus on the mental or thinking part of a situation and
make any emotions related to what they are thinking about unconscious.
Defensively reducing their awareness of their feelings protects them from
experiencing troubling emotions and also limits their (potentially
dangerous) need for the support of other people.
The defense mechanism of isolation, like many defenses, has a positive
use: isolation can be of value in situations where experiencing feelings may
be detrimental, as when a surgeon needs to distance herself from her
emotions to be able to cut into someone or when a military general needs to
plan strategy without being overwhelmed by the horror of war. However,
isolation can also lead to an inability to feel feelings at all, especially as
Fives overvalue thinking and underappreciate feeling. Fives also
intellectualize—talking about feelings without actually feeling them.
To protect themselves from having to feel painful feelings like sadness or
fear or loneliness, Fives withdraw from people who might stir up these
feelings, separate their thoughts from their emotions, and identify
themselves with their thinking function.

The Type Five Focus of Attention
Given Fives’ early experience and the coping strategy that arises to deal
with it, they focus on managing inner resources and potential impingements
on their privacy from the outside. This contributes to a general stance of
observing rather than participating, and a focus on the mental rather than
the emotional or “gut” level of life.
On the inside, Fives focus on minimizing needs, analyzing, and thinking,
and on the conservation and judicious use of energy and resources. One
Five I know likens his sense of his energy to a gas tank. When he wakes up
in the morning, he has a sense that he has a certain amount of energy in his
“tank” that has to last for the whole day. Not wanting to run out of gas, but
regularly fearful that he will, he has become an expert at knowing when
someone or something might threaten to deplete his energy supply too
much. Once he identifies people or activities that might overtax his
energetic resources, he can take steps to avoid or otherwise neutralize the
threat.
Fives like systems of knowledge and may become consumed by thinking
about projects, hobbies, or particular areas of study that engage their
interest. In a way that reflects their adherence to the idea that “knowledge is

power,” (and thus potentially a form of security) Fives seek to gain a kind
of mental mastery over information—knowledge about the people and
things happening around them, as well as specific topics that they enjoy
knowing about.
Fives focus on protecting the inside, putting attention toward limiting
intrusions and threats to inner resources and private space. Fives don’t like
surprises, and they dislike being subject to situations in which they might
have to deal with the emotions or the emotionality of others. Whereas other
types, like Twos and Nines, have difficulty erecting boundaries between
themselves and other people, Fives have no problem putting up and
maintaining boundaries—in fact, they tend to have the opposite issue: they
can have too many boundaries. Most of all, they want to know that they
have control over their boundaries, that they don’t have to be put in the
position of being intruded upon or invaded by others when they would
rather be alone.
Characteristically introverted, Fives can assess very quickly whether or
not they want to be involved with specific individuals. And when they do
interact with others, they can get a lot out of a little—they can be present
and sincerely engaged with others socially, but on a limited basis. In
addition, they can be highly selective, because they want the energy they
devote to social interactions to be limited to people they really like and trust
—and also subject to time limits of their choosing.

The Type Five Emotional Passion: Avarice
The passion of Type Five is avarice, or greed. However, avarice as it applies
to the Five personality does not necessarily imply a desire to hoard money
or wealth or material goods, as greed is often commonly understood. For
Fives, the central motivation of avarice is to hold onto what they have in
light of an early experience of not getting much from others. Not having
received enough love or care or responsiveness early on, Fives naturally
fear being depleted, which leads to a defensive expectation of
impoverishment. This poverty mentality in turn motivates Fives to reduce
their needs and hold back from giving to others: “By giving the little they
feel is theirs they feel that they will be left with nothing at all.”14
A poignant story I once heard a Five tell highlights this situation: The
main problem between him and his now ex-wife was that in their marriage
she experienced him as withholding his emotions and his affection from her.

He said that his wife was a Type Four, and if emotions were money, she
would have been a millionaire, while he had only a few pennies. When he
gave her six of his ten pennies, which was a lot to him, she saw it as
nothing.
Fives’ avarice thus represents a fearful grasping of time, space, and
energy, motivated by an underlying, unconscious fantasy that letting go
would result in catastrophic depletion. Behind the desire to hoard what little
they have, there is a deeper fear of impending impoverishment that has its
source in not having gotten enough nourishment.15 At the same time, they
may also have a fear of being overly encumbered by too many, or too
onerous, commitments.
Under the influence of avarice, Fives get minimalistic and contract,
withdrawing into themselves as a way of not letting others empty them out.
They fear both not having enough and being weighed down/having too
much to carry on their own. People may experience Fives as holding back
or being aloof, and they may be perceived as not engaging fully. As a result,
others may judge Fives as cold or unfeeling or arrogant, but behind this
habit of holding back and holding in is a fear of not having enough of what
they need to survive.
The Type Five coping strategy centers around avarice in that by
minimizing interactions that may be energetically costly, Fives believe they
can conserve their energy and hoard their precious resources. So, contrary
to the usual understanding of avarice as the greedy acquisition of more and
more potentially superfluous resources (like money and material goods), the
Five passion of avarice manifests as a preoccupation with maintaining a
grip on what minimal resources they think they have and feel in danger of
using up or otherwise losing.
Where some passions motivate the personality to move toward others too
intensely, avarice stimulates a move away from others. Avarice induces
Fives to erect firm boundaries, withdraw from others, and otherwise avoid
situations in which they might get depleted. Their desire not to be interfered
with, invaded, or subjected to external demands becomes a passion, leading
them to search inside themselves for what others look for outside
themselves.16

The Type Five Cognitive Mistake:
“Human Contact Exhausts Rather than Enriches”

We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and this continues even after the mental models that
create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore.17 While the passion
shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation” or
“cognitive mistake” preoccupies the personality’s mental thought processes.

Type Fives’ core beliefs reflect themes of isolation, emotional inhibition,
energetic withholding, the value of knowledge, and inadequacy. These
beliefs act as organizing principles that center around and reinforce the
following general idea: in a world that is intrusive or unresponsive, you
need to have the ability to withdraw inside yourself, take refuge in your
mind, and exercise control over interactions with the outside; otherwise,
you will be completely used up.
To support the passion of avarice, Fives hold the following core beliefs as
psychological organizing principles.18

People can be intrusive and threatening to my personal
comfort.
The world doesn’t always provide what you need, so it pays to
find ways to be self-sufficient.
Other people want more from me than I want to give.
I must protect my time and energy by having firm boundaries
and maintaining my private space; otherwise, others will
deplete me.

The emotional demands others make on me will exhaust my
inner resources and so should be avoided.
If I open up to relationships, others will expect and demand
more than I have to give. Having too many relationships with
the wrong kind of people leads to the risk of feeling totally
depleted.
Commitments to others are burdens that are too heavy to carry
with me. It’s best to travel light.
I am powerless when it comes to negotiating my needs and
desires, and others may not listen anyway, so the safest course
of action is to withdraw.
Overall, separation from others feels more comfortable than
the alternative.
If I am spontaneous in my actions or feelings, others will
disapprove, I will feel embarrassed, or I will feel out of control
or expose myself in a way that seems intolerable.
It’s better and safer to feel my emotions when I am by myself
(and not when I am in the presence of others).
Knowledge is power.
Knowledge is best attained through observation, research, and
the collection and compartmentalization of data.
In reaction to a world that seems to want too much, Fives believe they are
inadequately equipped to be present in an ongoing, engaged, and connected
way, so it’s better to avoid contact with others. By focusing on the demands
of others as potentially exhausting and the wisdom of being able to
withdraw from relationships, they continually confirm their conviction that
the best and safest solution to the threat of inner depletion is to observe,
detach from emotions, hoard their energy, and maintain boundaries to
protect their private space.

The Type Five Trap: “Scarcity Breeds Scarcity,” or “The Fear of
Depletion is Itself Depleting”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Five leads
the personality in circles. It represents an inherent “trap” that the limitations
of the personality cannot resolve.
Fives’ core beliefs keep them fixated in a world of scarcity because these
self-limiting ideas sap their motivation to do the work it would take to
realize the falsity of their underlying assumptions. Contrary to their
thinking when under the sway of this fixation, the world does provide
abundance, especially if you believe it does.
If you believe that emotional contact with the outside world can be
supportive, you are more likely to allow yourself to open up to the risk of
taking in sustenance from others. By not believing in abundance and the
possibility of external support, Fives remain stuck in the mental patterns
that make them feel safe. By cutting themselves off from potentially
nourishing relationships with other people, Fives don’t learn that their inner
resources can be renewed and refreshed, not just depleted, by social contact.
They deprive themselves through their adherence to a life strategy that cuts
them off from replenishment as a response to deprivation.

The Key Type Five Traits
The Centrality of Thinking

Fives’ “cognitive orientation” means that they“live in their heads” most of
the time. They relate to the world primarily through their thinking function
and tend to be very intellectual. A focus on thinking supports the Five’s
desire to observe and reflect on life instead of participate in it actively, in
spontaneous ways. Naranjo thus likens the satisfaction Fives seek in
thinking to a “replacement of living through reading.”20 Fives’ thinking
orientation also supports their sense that real power lies in acquiring
intellectual knowledge. Intense thinking activity also serves the purpose of
helping Fives prepare for life, a preparation that they always feel like they
need to do more of because they never feel ready enough.
Thinking also feels comfortable to Fives because when you think, you
can hide. Most people can’t tell what others are thinking, whereas when we
feel strong emotions, it often shows—we may share our feelings with others
whether we want to or not. The emphasis on cognition together with the

inhibition of feelings and action reflects Fives’ preoccupation with being an
observer of life—trying to figure out inside their heads what things mean
and what is going on without having to commit to showing up for life and
relationships. Feelings are not comfortable for the Five to experience and
express, so they rely on thinking, which allows them to remain in their
comfort zone.
Fives’ thinking tends to focus on figuring things out, preparing for
interactions, and engaging in mental classification and organization. They
are also attracted to thinking because it supports looking competent, which
can be a way of hiding or a way of communicating your value without
revealing too much of yourself. Naranjo also highlights the fact that Fives
tend to “dwell in abstractions while at the same time avoiding
concreteness,”21 and that this avoidance of the concrete is a way of
maintaining their hiddenness—they are able to offer their perceptions to the
world without having to betray the deeper substrate of emotional
attachments, motives, and values underlying those perceptions.
Drawn to tools and systems of knowledge, Fives feel most comfortable
when they are gathering data and figuring things out using their intellect.
Because they are oriented toward collecting and organizing information,
they often display a strong interest in science or areas of technical or
specialized knowledge. One of the easier ways for them to form
connections with others is through the sharing of knowledge and expertise
—both as a way of demonstrating their competence and participating in a
kind of connection that is less threatening.
Emotional Detachment and Feelinglessness

Fives automatically and unconsciously detach from emotions. This habit,
born of an early experience of deprivation or intrusion, serves Fives’
defensive structure in several ways. Emotional detachment allows them to
avoid uncomfortable emotions and the cost in energy of feeling them; to
remain aloof and separate from others (as feelings tend to connect people
across space and time); and to repress the need for relationships. The habit
of detaching from feelings helps Fives to avoid emotional burdens, the
realization of their own needs, and “unwanted” relationships.
It’s important to remember that Fives don’t consciously unhook from
emotions—rather, they experience a more automatic letting-go of emotion,
a more generalized lack of awareness of feelings, or an unconscious

interference with the generation of feeling.22 More prominent in the Five’s
conscious experience is a desire to keep a safe distance away from undue
emotional burdens and to maintain a sense of autonomy and control.
Type Fives’ lack of engagement with their own emotions also causes
them to have little tolerance for other people’s intense emotions. And while
this characteristic can make Fives seem cold, unfeeling, or unempathetic,
this lack of obvious empathy simply reflects the Five’s defensive stance, not
an intentional or mean-spirited disregard. The lack of feeling expressed by
most Fives represents a deep desire to remain hidden, to manage inner
resources without being disrupted, and to maintain a safe distance in
relationships.
Fear of Engulfment

Perhaps as a consequence of an early traumatic experience of feeling
intruded upon or having their boundaries disregarded, Fives typically feel
fearful of the possibility of being engulfed, taken over, or somehow used up
by others. This usually half-conscious fear, like their (related) fear of being
dependent on others, motivates Fives to avoid relationships. An anxiety can
arise in Fives, perhaps in ways they only dimly experience, that causes
them to hold onto what they have and to maintain strong boundaries by
making sure they have the necessary privacy and alone time they need to
maintain their independence. As Naranjo explains, “to the extent that
relationship entails alienation from one’s own preferences and authentic
expression, there arises an implicit stress and the need to recover from it: a
need to find oneself again in aloneness.”23
Autonomy and Self-Sufficiency

Fives both feel a need for and idealize autonomy.24 They highly prize selfsufficiency, a value that offers both a way of affirming and rationalizing
their preference for distance from others. Fives’ affinity for self-sufficiency
also relates to the value system associated with their coping strategy of
withdrawing from others: if you find it desirable to isolate yourself, you
need to be able to do without external supplies or stockpile them yourself.
As people who have given up on getting others to satisfy their desires, Fives
need to be able to build up their resources on their own.
By needing and valuing autonomy, Fives both enact their characteristic
coping strategy (designed to create distance in relationships to reduce the

threat of depletion) and find theoretical support for the way of life they find
most comfortable and attractive. Fives believe being alone is a good thing,
as it enables them to get by on their own without having to depend on
others or engage with them too much. Naranjo points out that this is the
philosophy of life that Herman Hesse has Siddartha vocalize when he says,
“I can think, I can wait, I can fast.” And it makes sense that Siddartha, the
young Buddha, expresses this idea, as Buddhism can be said to be a “Five”
spiritual path, characterized fundamentally by head-based practices focused
on the higher goal (the Five’s higher “Virtue”) of becoming non-attached.
Hypersensitivity

While Fives can appear detached or unfeeling on the outside, this stance
reflects (and protects) a much deeper inner sensitivity that the Five
defensive structure is designed to protect. Fives’ emotional detachment
arises out of a need to protect themselves from emotional pain, precisely
because they feel so vulnerable to it.
Type Fives’ habit of automatically detaching from feelings serves the
function of guarding against the experience of the pain of loneliness, fear,
hurt, powerlessness, and emptiness. The Five personality doesn’t usually
feel or acknowledge these emotions consciously in everyday life, but its
defensive structure develops in response to them—or the fear of them.
Naranjo points out that Fives’ tendency toward internal conservation and
minimalism contributes to their inner sensitivity to feeling deprived, since
“an individual who feels full and substantial can stand more pain than one
who feels empty.”25
Fives can also be very sensitive toward others, though they usually don’t
show it. Their tendency to withdraw might be seen as a defensive reaction
that expresses a desire to avoid having to feel the pain of others, since
empathizing with others’ pain can seem daunting and potentially exhausting
in light of their hypersensitivity. Their unreserved acceptance of boundaries
also displays this sensitivity, as Fives are mindful of others’ needs for space
based on their own concern with privacy and protection.
Because Fives do not live in their emotions, they may be more vulnerable
to the effects of emotional pain; they have not built up a tolerance for or a
comfort with their emotions and so may not know how to deal with painful
feelings. In light of this, Fives may have less ability to feel and weather
difficult emotions, and their seeming insensitivity might usefully be viewed

as a reflection of the greater protection they need with regard to strong
emotions.

The Type Five Shadow
Fives have blindspots related to their emotions, their need for love and
relationships, the possibility of abundant resources, and their own strength,
aggression, and power. Given their strategy of detaching from emotions and
protecting their boundaries to preserve energy and maintain a safe distance
from others, Fives may habitually separate themselves from their own
feelings and other people such that their potential for relationship and
connection remains hidden in their Shadow. Fives may undervalue their
emotional life to the point that they give up on developing their capacity for
feeling or expressing feelings. While they can be emotionally sensitive at a
deeper level, it doesn’t feel safe to express this, so they may stop believing
in their capacity for deep feeling.
Fives feel safest when they can be autonomous and self-sufficient—when
they can avoid having contact with their own need for people and for
outside support. Instead of seeing this as something that they consciously
avoid because it feels threatening, some Fives may believe they just don’t
like to be too close to too many people and so resign themselves to not
being very connected to others—or to maintaining very few close
relationships. As this tends to be what feels safe and comfortable, Fives
may not feel motivated to challenge their limited need for people. They may
not always recognize that, just like everybody else, they have needs for
support, because their desire for the nourishment that relationships provide
remains a blindspot.
While many Fives say they do want love and connection, most also focus
on maintaining firm boundaries. They anticipate being depleted, and they
don’t see that they only perceive their energy as a scarce commodity
because their defensive “self-system” has led them to believe in their inner
energetic poverty and motivated them to wall themselves off and live on
very little. Their potential for having abundant energy exists in their
Shadow. The truth they don’t see is that they have the capacity to generate
more internal resources and a greater wellspring of energy, especially if
they allow for more support and nurturance from the outside. Their belief in
their inner scarcity blinds them to the greater possibilities for abundance in
adulthood.

Conflict threatens to force Fives to expend energy they believe they don’t
have, so they avoid conflict and can disappear without walking away. While
Fives can bring significant strength to bear in establishing boundaries, their
sense of inner impoverishment can blind them to their (healthy) aggression,
their true strength, and their personal power.
Naranjo writes that Fives “may suffer a great deal as a result of their
incapacity to relate to others in overtly loving ways.”26 Being introverted,
private, and unemotional, they may seem to others like they have no interest
in love. And Fives may also see themselves as less loving than others.
Feeling safest when alone, Fives’ desire to receive love from others
becomes dampened through the habit of minimizing any need related to
being connected to or dependent on others. They typically do not believe
themselves worthy of receiving love because their disinterest in others leads
them to believe that they do not give enough.27
When Fives buy into their own limitations, they may experience
themselves as not interested in relating to others in deeper ways, and that
can become their reality. It is only the Five’s conditioned personality that is
limited in its ability to actively express and receive love, not their true self
—but as long as Fives believe that their capacities for love and intimacy are
limited, their true ability to love and be loved remains hidden from them in
their Shadow
The Shadow of the Type Five Passion:
Avarice in Dante’s Underworld
The passion of Type Five is a form of inner hoarding with the
classical name “avarice.” In the form of greed, it is a fixation on
acquiring and holding onto material wealth and resources, though
in the Five psyche, it connotes a withholding born of a fear of
depletion. In Canto VII of Inferno, Dante shows the ultimate
futility of clinging on to resources by punishing it in tandem with
its opposite. Thus, the Miserly and the Prodigal—those who
expressed avarice (mostly popes and cardinals) and those who
spent without moderation—are condemned to move in an eternal
circle, suffering the punishment of pushing against each other:
[F]rom both sides, to the sound of their own screams,
straining their chests, they rolled enormous weights. And

when they met and clashed against each other they turned to
push the other way, one side screaming, “Why hoard?,” the
other side, “Why waste?” And so they moved back round the
gloomy circle.
It was squandering and hoarding that have robbed them of
the lovely world, and got them in this brawl: I will not waste
choice words describing it!28
The fundamental sin of the Miserly and its punishment in Dante’s
underworld expresses the dark side of the passion of avarice as he
poetically comments on the heavy weight that material wealth can
become when we focus on the threat of depletion.29 Virgil
explains that no one can counteract the dictates of Fortune that
give some more than others, meaning that part of the mistake the
Avaricious make is that they don’t understand that “Fortune” or
life brings us enough resources to sustain us; we don’t have to
mess with the natural order of things by holding on so tightly.30
Further, Dante highlights one more feature of the Type Five
character, as he portrays the Miserly as “unrecognizable”—the
Pilgrim cannot recognize anyone of these sinners because their
concern with wealth left them undistinguished in life. Thus, Dante
symbolically communicates the shadow effect of Avarice on the
individual: by holding on and holding in, you end up carrying a
heavier load (rather than a lighter one) and wind up being
impossible to be seen and related to in the world of others.

The Three Kinds of Fives:
The Type Five Subtypes
THE PASSION OF TYPE FIVE IS AVARICE. All three Fives express a different
sense of what they focus on to sustain themselves given the passion of
avarice and the corresponding tendency to minimize needs and connections
with others. The Self-Preservation Five acts out avarice by building and
maintaining boundaries. The Social Five acts it out by adhering to specific
ideals related to groups and ideas. The Sexual Five acts it out by seeking an
experience of trust with a worthy partner and expressing romantic ideals.
Compared to some of the other personality types, like Fours and Sixes,
the three Type Five subtypes are relatively similar to each other. As Naranjo

explains, when it comes to the three instinctual subtypes, everything is more
monochromatic with Fives. All three look somewhat alike, so it can be
harder to tell them apart. The more intense Fours diverge more clearly in
one direction or the other, and they wind up being distinct characters whose
differences are easier to discern—but the Fives look more alike in their
characterological expression. However, there are some differences between
the three, including the fact, according to Naranjo, that Self-Preservation
Fives and Social Fives are more removed from their feelings, whereas
Sexual Fives are more intense, romantic, and sensitive inside.

The Self-Preservation Five:“Castle”
The Self-Preservation Five is the most “Five-ish” of the Fives. These Fives
express avarice through their passion for hiddenness or for having
sanctuary. The name given to this type is “Castle,” which communicates
this person’s need to be encastled—to be able to hide behind or be protected
by walls. Psychologically (and sometimes physically), Self-Preservation
Fives build thick walls to protect themselves from the world and from other
people.
Self-Preservation Fives have a need for clearly defined boundaries. This
personality is the clearest expression of the archetype of isolation and
introversion. They have a need to be able to hide behind boundaries they
can control, and to know they have a place of safety they can retreat to, in
order to avoid feeling lost in the world. In focusing on finding shelter, they
learn to survive inside walls—and they want to have everything inside those
walls so that they don’t have to venture out into the world. To them, the
external world can seem hostile, inadequate, and brutal.
Related to this need for the protection of clear boundaries, SelfPreservation Fives also focus a great deal of attention on how to survive
free from the limitation of external shocks or surprises. They have a feeling
of having to be on guard and a difficulty with expressing anger, though they
may communicate anger passively by withdrawing and hiding or going
silent.
Self-Preservation Fives’ need for hiddenness can create difficulties with
self-expression in general; this subtype is the least communicative of the
three Five subtypes. Their passion for hiddenness also manifests in taking
covert action: they act in secret so their actions do not compromise their
ability to keep their guard up.

The problem with this stance, especially when it tends toward the
extreme, is that living in an enclosure is not really compatible with having
and meeting basic human needs. The Self-Preservation Five is the most
withdrawn of the Fives, and, as a natural part of renouncing needs and
wants, they try to get by on very little, especially when it comes to the
emotional support that relationships provide. Self-Preservation Fives limit
their needs and wants because they believe that every desire could open the
door to their becoming dependent on others. Desires, then, are either
sublimated in specific interests or activities or erased from consciousness.
Self-Preservation Fives “live little,” meaning they get by with few
resources, which amounts to living small or poorly.
Naranjo explains that, normally, people have some ability to say, “I want
that”—to express desires and do the work they need to do to get what they
want—but these Fives cannot ask and cannot take. So they must rely on
preserving what they are able to acquire themselves.31
You can see these Self-Preservation Five characteristics clearly reflected
in the work of Franz Kafka (who was probably a Self-Preservation Five
himself), especially in the books The Castle and The Tremendous World I Have Inside
My Head, and in a story titled “The Hunger Artist,” in which the main
character becomes a specialist at renunciation.
In relationships with others, Self-Preservation Fives avoid creating
expectations or dependent relationships. They also avoid conflict, which is
another way they detach from people. They do, however, typically
experience a strong sense of attachment to a few places and people. To
prevent conflict and manage contact with others, they may adapt to fit in to
not be seen.
One Self-Preservation Five I know who can seem outwardly quite
sociable explains that she watches how other people interact and then acts
in similar ways, modeling what she does on what she observes, using her
ability to adapt to what is expected of her as a kind of camouflage. If people
don’t see her as especially reserved, she reasons, they won’t challenge her
boundaries. However, this need to adapt can cause Self-Preservation Fives
to feel resentful when they feel like they have to expend energy to fit in
with others.
While they may at times choose to share feelings with a trusted few
people in their lives, Self-Preservation Fives have strong inhibitions against
showing aggression in particular. They will very seldom show their anger.

However, they do have a kind of warmth and humor that is both a genuine
expression of their internal sensitivity and a defensive construction or social
shield. In social interactions, this can give their superficial acquaintances
the feeling that a bond has been established when the Self-Preservation Five
has merely been studying or placating them, not necessarily initiating a
relationship. As the most Fivish of the Five subtypes, it is unlikely that this
Five would be mistaken for another type.
Stacy, a Self-Preservation Five, speaks:
I am often told that I am a good listener. The truth is that I have
become an expert on asking just the right kind of questions—
those that will keep the other person talking while at the same
time allowing me to maintain a comfortable distance from any
topic that might require me to engage more fully. Under most
circumstances, I do not like talking about myself, and someone
who pushes me in this regard will feel intrusive. Within a small
circle of close and trusted friends, however, I will share quite
deeply. These are the people whose perspectives I seek out and
whose actions I study so that I can navigate my way through the
emotional world.
I rarely ask for favors. While I am happy to help out a friend in
need, the reciprocal nature of favor-doing feels suffocating to me.
I work very hard to make sure that my life is organized and
structured in a way that will require little assistance from others.
Only in the most extreme of circumstances will I reach out for
help, and then I will find myself immediately buying a thank you
gift to absolve myself of any perceived indebtedness. In general,
feeling needed by others just feels like the other person is being
too needy.
My most peaceful moments are when I have limited obligations
and can be on my own schedule, independent, and at home. Time
by myself is rejuvenating—and spending time in my home is
particularly restorative. Intrusions and unexpected visitors are
difficult to manage. I keep neighbors at an arm’s length and avoid
the yearly block party like the plague. When we first moved into
our home, a neighbor repeatedly asked me to join the book club

comprised of women from our neighborhood. Honestly, it was as
if she was asking me to run away with her and join a circus—the
idea was that strange and unappealing. I still hide from her when
I see her around.

The Social Five: “Totem”
For Social Fives, the passion of avarice is connected to knowledge. These
Fives don’t need the nourishment relationships provide because their
passion for knowledge somehow compensates for what they might get from
direct human contact. It’s as if they have an intuition that they can find
everything they need through the mind. Needs (for people and for
emotional sustenance) get displaced into a thirst for knowledge.
The name given to this subtype is “Totem,” which communicates their
need for “super-ideals,” or the need to relate to people who share their
intellectual values, interests, and ideals. The image of a totem suggests both
height and a character that is constructed (like an object) rather than a
human being. These Fives do not relate to regular people in everyday life—
they relate to easily idealized experts who share their ideals; to people who
display what they see as outstanding characteristics based on shared values
and knowledge and who they can keep at a certain distance. One Social
Five I know says he “collects people” who share his interests and values.
For Social Fives, then, avarice gets acted out through a greedy search for
the ultimate ideals that will provide a sense of meaning by connecting them
to something special, thereby elevating their life. The Social Five’s passion
is the need for the essential, the sublime, or the extraordinary instead of
what is here and now. In line with this need for relationships based on
shared ideals, Social Fives have a tendency to look upward, toward higher
values. According to Naranjo, they look toward the stars and care little for
life down on earth.
In contrast to Sexual Fives, who are iconoclasts, Social Fives are
admiring people—individuals who admire others that express their ideals in
extraordinary ways. In looking for and adhering to super-values, they can
be disdainful of ordinary life and ordinary people. The life of the mind feels
more compelling, and the people at a distance who represent the
extraordinary seem more seductive and interesting to them than the people
they meet in everyday life.

Social Fives are looking for the ultimate meaning in life, motivated by an
underlying (potentially unconscious) sense that things are meaningless
unless the ultimate meaning is found. This Five’s drive to find the
extraordinary underscores a polarity they may perceive between
extraordinariness and meaninglessness. They look for meaning to avoid a
fearful sense that the world is meaningless, but in their search for meaning
they orient themselves so much toward finding the quintessence of life—the
extraordinary—that they may become disinterested in everyday life. They
see a gap between the ideal and everyday life, and they burn in the longing
for the ultimate meaning. For this Five, motivated by the social instinct in
the service of avarice, the common, ordinary self does not have enough
value to satisfy their drive for meaning.
In their search for meaning, these Fives can become spiritual or idealistic
in a way that is actually counter to real spiritual attainment, because it
bypasses compassion and empathy and the practical level of how people
connect to each other in ordinary life. This tendency is the prototype of
what is sometimes called a “spiritual bypass,” in which a person looks for
and devotes himself to a higher ideal or a valued system of knowledge as a
way of avoiding doing the emotional and psychological work he would
need to do to grow and develop. They may believe they are transcending
their ego, but their adherence to their spiritual values or practice is their
way of escaping from their everyday emotional reality into a “higher”
intellectual system that they have idealized. Any type can spiritually
bypass, but the Social Five is the prototype of someone who employs this as
a defensive strategy.
Social Fives prefer not to feel. They can be mysterious and inaccessible,
or fun and intellectually engaging. They may hide out in the pose of an
expert, and they tend to have a sense of omnipotence through the exercise
of their intellect. These Fives may imagine that they are superior to others
because of their higher values and ideals. Although they would never
(intentionally) show it, they seek recognition and prestige; they want to be
someone important, and they often seek to fulfill this desire this by allying
themselves with people they admire.
Social Fives can look like Type Sevens in that they can be fairly outgoing
and display a great deal of excitement about interesting ideas and people.
The Social Five is typically more “out there” than other Fives, in the sense
of being more social and able to engage. Social Fives differ from Sevens,

however, in that they are more reserved, less self-interested, and less
emotional than Sevens.
Scott, a Social Five, speaks:
When I first encountered the Enneagram, I thought I was a Seven.
I consider myself very sociable, and I connect easily with people
—but on deeper reflection, I realized that my connections are
specifically with topic “experts” or people who share my
interests. I would choose my friends based on their intellect, and
the time we spent together would be focused on sharing ideas. I
realized I was a Five and not a Seven because I categorize people
and create barriers between myself and others by being invisibly
secretive. I ask lots of questions about the other person to avoid
being investigated by them. I often wonder, “Who am I? What is
this mystery inside myself?”
As a young child I would read encyclopedias, “How it Works”
books, and “Eyewitness” books all the time for fun. My inner
fantasy world was a bigger focus for me than the mundane world
outside of myself. On a long road trip to a holiday destination
with my family, I would imagine rebuilding a city with huge
statues of animals and architectural themes from Egypt. While
everybody went to the beach, I just wanted to read my books.
I’ve always wanted to change the world on a large scale—to
change it into the ideal world that I’ve imagined, irrespective of
whether that is actually practical or realistic.
To make sense of the universe as a whole, I studied metaphysics,
astrology, and different mystical, spiritual systems. I hoped that
each new subject I studied would offer me a new piece of the
puzzle I could use to find the meaning of life. Through a lot of
self-development work, I eventually realized that the only real and
meaningful experience is this moment, in the present.

The Sexual Five: “Confidence” (Countertype)
In the Sexual Five, avarice is expressed through an ongoing search for a
connection that will satisfy their need for an experience of the most perfect,

safest, and most satisfying (idealized) union. This Five may look like the
other two Five subtypes on the outside, having all the regular Five
inhibitions and introversion in the area of relationship, but the Sexual Five
places a special value on one-to-one or intimate connections.
This Five has a passion for finding a special person they can connect with
deeply, sometimes a person they cannot find or have yet to find. Like the
Social Five, this Five also searches for a high ideal, but this Five looks for
the ideal in the realm of love. This Five feels a need to find a high exemplar
of absolute love. Like the search for the extraordinary of the Social Five,
the ideal kind of connection this Five searches for represents a very high
standard. Sexual Fives seek something like the ultimate mystical union—an
experience of the divine in human relationship. And this can also happen
with the search for good friends or a spiritual teacher.
While Social and Self-Preservation Fives are more removed from their
emotions, the Sexual Five is intense, romantic, and more emotionally
sensitive. This Five suffers more, resembles the Four more, and has more
overt desires. This is the countertype among the Fives. It may not be
completely obvious from the outside, however—they may seem very much
like other Fives until you touch their romantic spot and inspire their
romantic feelings.
While they can appear reserved or laconic on the outside, Sexual Fives
have a vibrant internal life that is highly romantic. There are examples of
Sexual Five artists—like Chopin, who Naranjo notes is the most romantic
of the classical composers—who display extreme emotional expressiveness
through their artistic creations but are cut off in many ways from others in
the everyday world.32
Sexual Fives live in an inner world filled with ideation, theories, and
utopian fantasies about finding unconditional love. They live for a couple’s
love as a kind of ultimate or ideal experience of connection. However, what
they search for represents an idealized form of relationship that may not
exist in the human world.
Trust is the basic issue with the Sexual Five. The name Naranjo ascribes
to this subtype is “Confidence,” which has a special meaning related to an
ability to trust the other, and suggests a search for the person who will be
with you no matter what, the partner (or friend) that you can trust with all
your secrets. Confidence is the kind of ideal that makes Sexual Fives very

romantic deep inside. They search for an idealized version of love and
relationship as a source of meaning in life.
The Sexual Five’s search for a high exemplar of connection is so
exacting that it’s very hard to pass their test with consistency if you are the
person in relationship with them. It’s very easy for the Sexual Five to be
disappointed. This subtype has such a great need to trust in the other that
the need is not easily satisfied, and so there can be a lot of testing in their
relationships.
Fives tend to be a private people, but this Five has a great need for
intimacy under the right circumstances—if they can find a person they can
really trust to love them despite their flaws. This subtype expresses a need
to be completely transparent with their partner, and they need their partner
to be very open as well—and this ideal of trust and intimacy is not easy to
find. Because of this, Sexual Fives can get very picky about the people they
have relationships with, and they can become frustrated when they discover
that the other is human. If a partner does not live up to their expectations of
transparency and openness, they tend to feel disappointed and—because
they have a fear of being hurt by others—to isolate themselves.
Some Sexual Fives say that their search for an ultimate kind of
connection does not only center on relationships with a lover or life partner.
One Five said he related to the idea of “emotional promiscuity,” saying, “I
want ultimate contact with a lot of people,” one at a time. And some Fives
with this subtype report that although they feel guarded in the face of too
much emotional intensity, they have a deep desire for intimacy with a
trusted few. One Five with this subtype described especially appreciating
the experience of “clicking” with someone—the feeling of having
chemistry with another person—saying that when he felt this he could
become infatuated very quickly.
Although the Sexual Five may look like a Type Four, this Five is still
quite Five-ish, so is not likely to be mistaken for a Four. And while this
subtype is the Five countertype and seeks to manifest an ideal of intimacy,
it may be hard to discern the difference between this Five and the other two
Fives, as all of the Five subtypes experience a need to withdraw. However,
This Five has a need to find a special relationship that will provide both
safety and an ultimate kind of love.
Stephen, a Sexual Five, talks about his subtype:

Full access to my feelings came after I started doing body work in
my early 30s, and they were, and sometimes still are, very
confusing and overwhelming—especially “softer” emotions like
compassion. I’ll find myself with tears welling up at times and
need to look inside for the trigger, which can be as simple as the
sight of a homeless person on the side of the road. My adult life
has been a constant tension between my point’s need to pull in
and husband my (emotional, physical, intellectual, financial)
resources, and a mostly stronger drive to reach out and connect,
not merely with my intimate partner, but nearly everywhere.
The reaching out is an attempt to fill an existential-psychic hole
that seems to have existed from a prenatal stage. I seek
connections with others to avoid feeling that emptiness. The name
of the subtype, Confidence, is about building a bond with another
(or many others on a one-to-one basis). For instance, when I have
to give talks to a group, I find a single person to be my focus,
while appearing to address the group. Relationships are the most
fearful of objects, yet the most needed.
I have been called out on Enneagram panels as not looking like
other Fives—too flamboyant, too out, too willing to talk about the
inner landscape and the demons that inhabit it. This is true, and
in my youth it was (physical) camouflage. Now it is merely a way
of being. I have learned that the desire to disappear into the
background of my youth was a false hope, and since I cannot
disappear, I might just as well be who I really am.
The most important thing that needs to be understood about the
Sexual Five is that we are in a constant struggle between the
withdrawing and withholding (stinginess) of the basic point, and
the need to reach out and connect driven by the instinctual energy
of the subtype. Behind this tension is an emotional sensitivity that
is hidden to the outside world and also to the Five until they [we]
allow awareness of emotions into their daily life.

“The Work” for Type Five:
Charting a Personal Growth Path

ULTIMATELY, AS FIVES WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of walling themselves off from the sustenance
of emotional connections with others—thereby intensifying their inner
sense of scarcity—by creating a stronger connection to their own emotions,
learning to believe in their own abundance, and opening themselves up to
receiving more love and support from others.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Fives, this process involves observing the ways in which
they perpetuate their own sense of inner depletion; exploring the ways they
maintain a sense of safety by erecting boundaries and limiting contact with
others; and making active efforts to expand their comfort zone in social
interactions. It is particularly important for them to learn to challenge their
beliefs about inner scarcity, open up to receiving more nourishment from
the outside, and regain a greater sense of inner aliveness and vitality
through feeling and expressing more of who they are.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Fives can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Fives take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Hoarding and withholding inner resources out of a perception of scarcity and fear of depletion

Observe your tendency to operate from the assumption that your time,
energy, and other resources are scarce. What ideas do you have that you are
basing this kind of thinking on? Notice any worry you feel or thoughts that
arise about not having enough energy to do things or interact with people.
Note what kinds of experiences make you fixate on your energy level.
Observe any ways you hoard time, materials, or private space. Notice if you

withhold yourself or your input from others, how you do this, and what you
are thinking about (or feeling) when you do this.
Detaching from emotions and emotional life

Observe the ways in which you detach from your emotions (if you can see
how this happens). Notice any situations in which you might feel
something, but you don’t. Can you catch yourself in the act of detaching
from your feelings or distancing yourself from something or someone that
might stir up emotion? Observe your inner territory for any signs of feeling
or sensitivity with the same interest you might apply in observing others
from a safe distance. Are there some emotions you feel more than others?
Are there some emotions you avoid more than others? Notice when you
delay feeling your emotions until you are alone. Are there specific emotions
you feel more or less comfortable feeling in the presence of others? Notice
especially the ways you rationalize not feeling your feelings and avoiding
an acceptance and experience of others’ feelings.
Distancing yourself from others through excessive boundaries, the need for control, and a fear of
external demands

Observe the different ways you make boundaries with people. Notice how
this happens and if you register any feelings that motivate you when you’re
establishing boundaries. Observe the way you try to control situations and
what your thinking is behind your efforts to establish control. Notice when
you distance yourself from others and how you do it. Are there some people
you want more distance from than others? What ideas and factors do you
base these choices on? Observe any fears that arise—or thoughts about how
to avoid feeling fear—when you think about interacting with specific
people in specific situations.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Fives observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do

—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Fives can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider, to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns.
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Fives cope?

Although Fives are naturally curious, sometimes they don’t get curious
about the ways in which they limit themselves with the defenses associated
with their personality. Unlike other Enneagram types, who may actively
suffer as a result of their habitual patterns, many Fives feel relatively
comfortable with their defensive posture because it allows them to feel safe
and in control. It provides them with a way to get away from difficult
feelings—both their own and other people’s—and it helps them avoid
having to feel fear. But the Five personality is a contracted stance that
actively reduces Fives’ connection to themselves and others, and thus
constrains their ability to grow. It can be useful and enlivening for Fives to
look deeper into themselves and their own history—to see how their
patterns of thinking and behaving represent an ongoing overreaction to the
legitimate need to protect their precious sensitivity early on.
While it may seem like “looking for trouble” at first, Fives can wake up
to the ways in which they keep themselves cut off from life by hiding out in
their “acorn shell” by examining how they came to need so much protection
in the first place.
What painful emotions are the Type Five patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what Karen Horney calls our “basic anxiety”—a preoccupation
with the emotional stress of not getting basic needs fulfilled. In response to
an experience of stress, Fives adopt a strategy that centers on detaching
from painful feelings and finding sanctuary in their heads. While inquiring
into the painful emotions they might be avoiding goes against the main goal
of their coping strategy, exploring what they might be missing in not having
an ongoing connection to their emotions can potentially help Fives find
more meaning, richness, and satisfaction in life. By at first thinking about,

and then eventually and gently moving towards feelings they habitually cut
themselves off from, Fives can reconnect with their own emotional vitality
in a way that can be truly energizing. To know all that they can become,
Fives must open themselves up to the fear, sadness, and anger they may not
know they have inside.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Five patterns operate in me now?

Through reflecting on how and why the Five patterns operate in the present
as a protection in everyday life, Fives can increase their awareness of how
they maintain boundaries and avoid engaging with the emotional part of life
as a way of staying safe and undisturbed. It also can’t hurt for Fives to
revisit the deeper motives behind their patterns. Questioning the reasons
they habitually protect themselves from a deeper engagement with life can
help Fives to develop more self-knowledge about how they hold themselves
back in ways that may not serve them. By watching how they steer clear of
emotional entanglements and external demands to stay safe, they can
examine how these habits might prevent them from growing. Rationalizing
the desirability of the Five fixation can be part of the fixation, and it will be
important for Fives to at least be honest with themselves about that, so they
can make the conscious choice about whether they want to change or not.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Fives keep themselves from seeing?

Some Fives may be okay with remaining within the safe confines of their
“acorn shells.” And this is understandable, given that the walls they build
protect them from the pain of having needs and sensitivities in a world that
can seem unresponsive or depleting. But it may be important for them to at
least consider what they might be missing. The solution of distancing
involves a kind of blindness to the value of feelings and the possibilities
inherent in being more connected to your own power and aliveness. If you
are a Five, the comfort associated with resignation may be distracting you
from seeing how much better life might be if you allowed for greater
contact with the right people. Whether or not anyone chooses to grow is up
to them, but we owe it to ourselves to fully appreciate what our options are
and what our defenses hide from us. If you are a Five, how good might your
life be if you were able to take the risk to open up more and challenge the
rigidity of your defenses?

What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The trap involved in Fives’ personality programming is that in building
your life around a sense of scarcity and a fear of depletion, you intensify
your experience of resource scarcity and the threat of being impoverished.
While the Five coping strategy of employing “distance machinery” through
“availing [yourself] of a good wall”33 can lead to a comfortable sense of
isolation, it may also intensify an ongoing fear of violation or intrusion.
What Naranjo calls “the vulnerability and impotence involved in an
exaggeratedly passive and unexpressive or unfeeling disposition”34 can
leave Fives feeling powerless and insecure. Fully exploring how their
defensive patterns operate can open the door for Fives to reconnect with
themselves on a deeper level, and it can lead them out of the trap of having
to shrink themselves as the only way to feel secure.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to actively think, feel, and act with more choice
and awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Fives about “what to
do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns of your core type
described above in the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the
Enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to
study your passion (or “Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite,
the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Five Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them

Hoarding and withholding inner resources out of a perception of
scarcity and fear of depletion
Challenge false beliefs about scarcity. Fives benefit from challenging the false belief

that they don’t have enough resources to survive. Recognize that it only
seems like you have limited time, space, and energy because of early pivotal
and painful experiences. In reality, you have as many abundant resources as
you believe you have (or let yourself have). And connecting more with
other people actually increases the resources you have available to you
because it expands your sources of support. Reminding yourself to have
faith in abundance initiates a positive cycle of access to more and more of
what you (falsely) think you don’t have very much of.
Remind yourself that scarcity breeds scarcity. It’s almost a truism these days that what

we believe shapes our reality. When you view the world through a lens that
sees everything in terms of the scarce resources that you have to hold on to,
you may magnify your experience of scarcity. Focusing on what you have
to grasp onto in order to survive only perpetuates the belief in and the
reality of insufficiency. A scarcity mentality keeps you trapped in a mental
model in which you have to get by on very little.
Find direct ways to fill yourself up on the outside. If you are a Five, it can be difficult to

embark on a growth path because it goes against your grain to make efforts
to feel more emotions, share more of yourself, and reach out to others more
purposefully. But as Naranjo indicates, “being an observer of life naturally
leads to a feeling of not living, and this may stimulate a desire for
experience.”35 Turn up the volume on any desires you might have to
experience more of life, and support yourself in taking the risk to find ways
of experiencing the world that feed you and enhance your life. Whether it’s
getting a massage, letting someone take you out to dinner, or sharing more
of yourself with someone you trust, allow yourself to increase the
pleasurable ways in which you participate in the external world.

Detaching from emotions and emotional life

Become more aware of the choice to detach from feelings. An important first step in being

able to connect more with your feelings and empathize more with others is
noticing when you detach from your emotions or otherwise stop yourself
from feeling. Recognize when you may be thinking about feelings rather
than actually experiencing emotions. It may be important to think about
feelings in the early stages of your self-work, but remember to discern the
difference. Notice when you detect an absence of feeling when you might
(logically) be inspired to feel something, and allow yourself to shift your
attention to your body, with the intention of being open and alert to picking
up subtle signs of emotion. Engaging in physical exercise can also be an
important way to get out of your head and into your heart and your body.
Make efforts to feel more emotions more often. For Fives who feel a longing to connect

more fully with others despite their defensive personality tendencies,
growth entails making continual efforts to reattach to life—making it a
practice to try to engage with and express feelings more regularly. Allowing
for real needs and feelings to arise, and gently letting yourself open up to
them, helps you to wake up to parts of yourself that you may automatically
avoid. Start by trying to feel your emotions when you are alone and then
expand your efforts to paying attention to your feelings when you are with
others. And try to talk more about your feelings with people you trust.
Make a point to see the upside of emotions and emotional connections. Remind yourself of

all the good aspects of connecting with your emotions, even if you don’t
fully believe there are any at first. If you do have a positive experience of
connecting with someone else emotionally, keep this in the forefront of
your mind as something to remember when thoughts about the
disagreeability of feeling your emotions surface. Celebrate small victories
of emotional connectedness, knowing that it’s okay to take small steps
toward a more positive view of the relational possibilities that become
available to you when you can open up to feeling.

Distancing yourself from others through excessive boundaries, the
need for control, and a fear of external demands
Recognize that your sense that there’s nothing wrong is part of your fixation. Fives are so good

at doing what they do that they can go to sleep to the fact that they may be

severely limited by their personality’s fixation. It can seem to Fives who
live safely behind carefully constructed barriers that there’s nothing to fix.
When in the grip of their personality, Fives typically feel a comforting sense
of control. They are good at avoiding people who are needy and
overemotional; they excel at maintaining boundaries; and they know how to
control life so they can avoid feeling their fear. When I moderate panels of
educated self-observers as a way of teaching the Enneagram, it can be hard
to find Fives who can testify in a clear way about why their programming is
something they might want to grow out of. Seeing the comfort and control
that comes from a good system of protective barriers can be the first step to
seeing the problems inherent in this strategy.
Get in touch with the fear that motivates distancing and wall-building. Although Fives are

“fear types” within the Enneagram framework, because they hide, they
don’t connect with their fear very much. As Naranjo (a Five himself) points
out, unlike Sixes, who feel their fear because they don’t hide as much, Fives
specialize in avoiding situations in which they will feel fear. If they can
allow themselves to not hide as much, and get more in touch with fear, they
can reduce the rigidity of the defenses they use to help them avoid the
experience of fear altogether.
Move forward into life instead of withdrawing inside yourself. Although it goes against the

Five’s personality program, Fives who seek to grow must move forward
into life more, find a deeper energy source inside, and reconnect with
feelings, instead of hiding deep inside themselves. If you are a Five, when
the automatic defensive impulse to distance yourself arises, as a first step,
experiment with just staying still and not automatically disconnecting. Start
to notice how and when you withdraw and, practice staying put instead.
Whether in relationships, in conflict situations, or in your work life, play
with the possibility of making the choice to move toward people and more
into the flow of life. Remind yourself that learning to risk trusting the
outside world is a big and wonderful step for you to take toward your own
enlivenment.

The Inner Flow for Type Five: Using the Arrow Lines to Chart
Your Growth Path

In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
defines one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its
“growth–(through)-stress” point, and its “child–heart-(security)” point map
one kind of growth path described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow
lines can be seen to suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “stress–growth” point ahead
represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally fall back
into as a comfort in times of stress, and now must reintegrate
consciously.

Type Five Moving Forward to Type Seven: Consciously Using the
Seven “Stress–Growth” Point for Development and Expansion

The Inner Flow growth path for Type Fives brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Seven: using levity, sincere
intellectual interest, innovative thinking, and creative options as a way of
interacting more directly with the outside world. Consciously drawing on
the natural strengths of the Seven archetype can help Fives see how they
can engage more fully with others without having to disappear. While Fives
can move to the Seven Point in times of stress, causing them to act out their
nervousness in social situations through anxious laughter or a manic way of
talking, they can work to ease this tension with awareness by consciously
embodying aspects of the high side of Seven. Fives can expand their ability
to share more of themselves with others by intentionally using humor,
playfulness, and intellectual curiosity to help them to manage any anxiety
they might feel when opening up more socially.
The Five working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools healthy Type Sevens use: creative thinking and an interest in people in
support of an engaged focus on interacting more deeply with others. The
Seven stance has a basis in generating options as a way of seeing different
ways of dealing with situations, even in the midst of underlying anxiety.
The mental habits of finding connections and enthusiastically participating
in the exchange of ideas can provide a good model for Fives seeking to
expand their comfort zone by sharing more of themselves with others. The
quick and agile way of thinking Sevens use to connect their feelings and
ideas with those of others can support Fives in finding more ways to link up
their own ideas and emotions more with the outside world.

Type Five Moving Back to Type Eight: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Fives calls for them to reclaim their ability to
engage more actively, more fearlessly, and more powerfully in the world.
The Eight Point can be a place of comfort for Fives who allow themselves
more freedom to assert themselves and enforce the boundaries they need.
The Eight archetype may also represent what didn’t work for Fives in their
early environment. Fives’ early impulses to act in direct ways to get what
they needed—the Eight-ish strategy of self-assertion—may not have been
seen or supported in childhood, and they may have retreated when force
didn’t work. However, the Eight experience likely continued to be a place

Fives moved to after childhood to find comfort in feeling free to act in
powerful ways to protect themselves, erect walls, or push people away.
Navigated consciously, Fives can use the “move to Eight”
developmentally—to reestablish a healthy balance between withdrawing
and moving out into the world. Fives can focus on the qualities and highside traits of this “child-heart” point to understand what they may have
needed to repress to get along in the world, and what they can usefully
reintegrate to support their growth toward the Seven Point.
Moving back to Eight with awareness can thus be a way for Fives to
reengage with their lost sense of their power and authority, a way for them
to feel more strength in dealing with fear, engaging with their emotions, and
interacting with others. Fives can support themselves in their self-work and
expansion by consciously calling on the gifts Eights have in expressing
anger in productive ways, making big things happen, and asserting
themselves to impact people in positive ways. Instead of always having to
survey what’s happening from a safe distance and think before doing
anything, they can act more decisively in the world.
By reincorporating Type Eight attributes, Fives can consciously remind
themselves that it’s okay to own your authority, express yourself more
powerfully, and use strength to both make boundaries and open up to the
vulnerability entailed in sharing yourself more with other people. Through
owning these Eight abilities, Fives can heal any childhood hurts associated
with having to hide out instead of express themselves more powerfully, and
they can draw on a more present sense of their own authority to support the
challenges entailed in embodying more of the idealism, optimism, and
possibilities for expansion associated with the Seven Point.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion: Accessing Avarice and Aiming for
Non-Attachment
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
Five, the Vice (or passion) of the type is avarice and its opposite, the Virtue,
is nonattachment. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to Virtue
conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion functions
and consciously work toward the embodiment of our higher Virtue, the

more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and fixated
patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side or “oak tree–Self.”
As Fives become more familiar with their experience of avarice and
develop the ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work
further by making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to
the passion of avarice. In the case of Type Five, the Virtue of nonattachment
represents a state of being that Fives can attain by consciously manifesting
their higher capacities.
Nonattachment is a way of being that is oriented toward letting go of the
need to grasp what feels necessary to staying safe, and opening up to a
deeper experience of the natural flow of life. For Fives, the virtue of
nonattachment can inspire them to work toward releasing their need to
control what happens and make sure the way is safe before moving forward.
Nonattachment requires Fives to explore the ways in which they hold on to
and hoard time, space, and energy, and to challenge their beliefs in scarcity.
As fear types who cope by controlling precious resources, Fives’ deeper
anxiety manifests in the habits of holding on and holding back. By facing
and working through their fear of depletion, they can work toward the
higher goal of seeing through their false expectation that life won’t support
them. This, in turn, allows them to release their attachments to the things
they think they need to survive all alone in the world.
Working toward embodying nonattachment means recognizing what it
means to be attached, seeing what you are attached to, and having the faith
to let go of what your acorn-self personality thinks you need to hold on to to
survive. Sandra Maitri points out that the “attachment” that Fives must
learn to let go of to grow is not the kind of “attachment” we commonly
think of—“forming deep bonds with others”—but rather the opposite, a
sense of “clinging to things” in light of a perception of a lack of such
bonds.36 As a guide to nonattachment, Maitri highlights Buddhist teachings
that encourage us to see and release our attachments to possessions, beliefs,
and, ultimately, our ego’s need to control reality as a way of freeing
ourselves from the suffering attachment inevitably causes. Achieving a state
of nonattachment works in exactly this way for Fives. When they can wake
up to the ways they cling to their ideas and assumptions about what they
need to control to stay safe and supplied, Fives open the door to a deeper
acceptance of life as it is. When they can do this, they can release the need

for control and withholding and open up to a more enlivening engagement
with the world.
In consciously letting go of attachments, their belief in their separateness,
and their need for control, Fives can allow themselves to connect to the
abundance that is available to them in the larger, interconnected world of
nature and other people.

Specific Work for the Three Type Five Subtypes
on the Path from Vice to Virtue
Whatever type you are, the path from observing your passion to finding its
antidote is not exactly the same for each of the subtypes. The path of
conscious self-work has been characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and
grace:”37 the grit of our personality programming, the grind of our efforts to
grow, and the grace that comes to us from working toward our virtue in
conscious and positive ways. Each subtype has to grind, or exert effort,
against something slightly different. This insight is one of the great benefits
of understanding the three distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.
Self-Preservation Fives can travel the path from avarice to nonattachment by

taking the risk to relax boundaries and barriers to connection more often,
and by making more efforts to share their feelings with other people, even
when it opens the door to fear or anxiety. People with this subtype can
usefully work to notice how their beliefs about what’s possible or desirable
in relationships and in the world hold them back from getting the
recognition or support that might help them grow. Rather than becoming
fixated in resignation, challenge your sense of what’s possible and imagine
all the ways you might allow yourself to grow and expand if you didn’t feel
like you needed such high walls around you. Remind yourself that you can
open up to letting more people in more deeply and more often and still
maintain a healthy sense of control in your life. Wake yourself up to ways
in which you might be “living little,” and realize that you don’t necessarily
have to make yourself smaller to feel okay. Open up to seeing ways you
might share your gifts with the world if you were to spend more time
outside the walls of your castle.
Social Fives can travel the path from avarice to nonattachment by broadening

their focus of attention from knowledge and information to a greater sense

of emotional engagement with real people. If you are a Social Five, notice
when your devotion to high ideals displaces an openness to what’s
happening in everyday life and actually causes you to close yourself off to
others. Recognize when you may be idealizing or overidealizing experts
and a narrow set of (potentially distant) individuals—getting your relational
needs met indirectly rather than taking the risk of interacting more directly
with the people in your immediate environment. Notice and work against
the tendency to connect only through shared ideas by intentionally sharing
more of your emotions and gut feelings with others. Examine the ways in
which you might be attached to trying to create meaning and avoid a deeper
fear of meaninglessness through specific values and ideals; challenge
yourself to more fully experience your fears as a first step on the path of
letting go of those attachments. Appreciate the joys of everyday life and the
full range of human expression as a way of expanding your focus to allow
for a richer experience of what life has to offer you.
Sexual Fives can travel the path from avarice to nonattachment by noticing and

working against the tendency to hold others to high standards as a way of
avoiding intimacy. Recognize when you are testing others or adhering to
impossible standards of connection as a way to avoid your fear and defend
against your own fear of exposure. Notice the ways in which you might
close yourself off to contact even as you long for it. Work toward achieving
the intimate connection you desire—not through an attachment to an ideal
of what love can be, but through taking the risk to express your real feelings
to the people in your life. Allow yourself to feel into and work with the fear
that arises as you open yourself up to deeper relationships and authentic
expressions of your emotions. Release your preconceived ideas about what
connecting with others is supposed to be about, and challenge yourself to
just allow contact to happen. Let yourself be surprised by life, and
communicate the beauty of your deeply romantic feelings and desires more
frequently and in more ways.

Conclusion
THE FIVE POINT REPRESENTS the ways we close ourselves off to contact with
the world as a way of staying safe and in control. The Five path of growth
shows us how to transform our fear of fear and impulse to withdraw into the
will to share more of who we are and connect in deeper ways with

ourselves and others. In each of the Type Five subtype personalities, we see
a specific character who teaches us what is possible when we can turn our
fearful desire to remain separate and contracted into a fully awake ability to
connect with who we are and what we may become, thereby engaging more
deeply in the flow of life through the alchemy of self-observation, selfdevelopment, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 8

The Point Four Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
Man only likes to count his troubles; he doesn’t calculate his
happiness.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky

I have the true feeling of myself only when I am unbearably unhappy.
—Franz Kafka

Sorrow prepares you for joy. It violently sweeps everything out of your
house so that new joy can find space to enter.
—Rumi

TYPE FOUR REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who experiences an
inner sense of lack and a craving for that which is missing, and yet can’t
allow for the attainment of what might provide satisfaction. This
archetype’s drive is to focus on what is lacking as a step to regaining
wholeness and connection, but through an over-focus on the experience of a
flawed self they become convinced of an inner deficiency that prevents
fulfillment. While this entails an understandable frustration with regard to
deprivation, an overidentification with the frustrated, deprived state leads to
an inability to take in that which would provide fulfillment.
This Four archetype can also be found in Jung’s concept of the “shadow,”
defined as “the inferior parts of the personality.”1 While Type Threes
overidentify with the persona, or the positive aspects of ourselves we
highlight in the “public face” we show to the world, Type Fours
overidentify with those parts of ourselves we’d rather others don’t see.
Although Fours may also recast their sense of deficiency as being “special”
or “unique” as a way of valuing themselves on a surface level, they identify
with a deficient self more than an idealized self.
The Four archetype also represents the archetype of the tragic artist who
suffers in the service of artistic self-expression. It suggests an idealistic

vision of the value of emotions, especially the way in which authentic
emotions are usefully expressed through art in a mode that inspires, moves,
and unites people.
The Four’s resonance with the Shadow can also be seen in the fact that
they have a natural gift for understanding the deeper emotional level of
experience and seeing the beauty in darker emotions that other types would
rather not feel, much less acknowledge. This can make them feel dangerous
to others on an unconscious level, as Fours may raise the issue of authentic
emotions that others would often rather not deal with.
Type Fours are thus the prototype for that part in all of us that feels
dissatisfied with who we are. We all have the capacity to feel bad about
what we see as our flaws, and to grieve and long for what we see as lacking
in our lives. We can all become depressed in the face of feeling inadequate
when we don’t fit the idealized image of what we believe we have to be to
get the love we want. This archetype thus represents the tendency we all
have to develop an “inferiority complex,” which makes it difficult to feel
good about ourselves and take in what is good from the outside.
The natural strengths of Type Fours include their large capacity for
emotional sensitivity and depth, their ability to sense what is going on
between people on the emotional level, their natural feel for aesthetics and
creativity, and their idealistic and romantic sensibility. Relatively unafraid
of intense feelings, Fours value the expression of authentic emotion and can
support others with great care, respect, and sensitivity when they are
experiencing painful emotions. Fours are highly empathic and can see the
beauty and power in painful feelings that other types habitually avoid.
Fours’ “superpower” is that they are naturally emotionally intuitive.
Fours’ regular contact with their own emotional terrain gives them a lot of
comfort and strength in being with intense feelings and empowering others
to feel and accept their emotions. Although it would be wrong to think that
all Fours are artists or all artists are Fours, they do have an artistic impulse
that enables them to see and respond to the poetry in life, and to highlight
for others the way everyday experiences can be viewed and communicated
in creative and even transcendent ways.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Fours’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel:” they can
overdo their focus on pain and suffering, sometimes as a way of avoiding a
deeper or different kind of pain. While they have a gift for emotional

sensitivity, they can become attached to their feelings in a way that can
prevent them from thinking objectively or taking action. They can see
what’s missing so clearly that they may be blind to what is good or hopeful
in a situation, often to their own detriment. However, when they can wake
up to the ways in which they dwell in suffering or dramatize their emotions
as a way of distracting themselves from their deeper need for love, they can
express a special kind of wisdom that is informed by deep emotional truth.
The Type Four Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey:
Hades and The Sirens
When Odysseus asks the goddess Circe to help him on his
journey home, Circe tells Odysseus he must go to Hades and
perform blood rituals so he can speak with the spirit of Tiresias,
who will give him further guidance. In return for Odysseus’s
blood sacrifice, the blind prophet tells him his future, good and
bad to the very end:
Glorious Odysseus, what you are after is sweet homecoming,
but the god will make it hard for you…But even so and still
you might come back, after much suffering, if you can
contain your own desire,…Death will come to you from the
sea, in some altogether unwarlike way, and it will end you in
the ebbing time of a sleek old age. Your people all about you
will be prosperous. 2
Odysseus hears from other spirits in the Land of the Dead, but
their common message is a litany of regret for their choices in life
and envy for those still living. Hades thus represents “the land of
what might have been, a place we are all destined to visit at one
time or another.” However, Hades also conveys a message about
the role of longing and regret in human life. We can potentially
get stuck in a “Hades” of our own making if we don’t just visit
our internal spaces of grief, but live our whole lives around “the
aching sense of loss and failed dreams.”3 After this visit to the
underworld, Odysseus can more mindfully choose life, having
spoken with the ghosts of his past who symbolize the cravings
and unfulfilled longings of the psyche—his shadow aspects—that

he must make peace with and let go of to move ahead in his
journey home.4
The next destination further reveals the nature of longing. After
leaving Hades, Odysseus and his crew sail past the Sirens’ Island.
The Sirens can feel the unique anguish of each individual. They
enchant whomever comes their way, seducing travelers with their
melody so they have no prospect of getting home. They sing to
Odysseus that they know all the pains he suffered in the Trojan
War. And they promise him wisdom if he will listen to his heart’s
content. They will reveal to him the meaning underlying his own
suffering. “What song could be sweeter? Who wouldn’t die to
listen?”5
Odysseus makes a voluntary personal decision to listen to the
Sirens’ song and know the depth of human longing and
temptation. He knows in advance he will encounter these
temptresses. He knows their exquisite singing draws sailors to
their deaths, dashed against the rocks. First, he protects his men
by fitting wax into their ears. But he also orders them to tie him to
the mast and ignore his impassioned pleas until they have passed
the danger.
Only careful planning saves Odysseus from his own irresistible
longing for this experience. Otherwise, the temptation to explore
unfathomable emotional depth would have ended, as it so often
does, in total self-destruction.
Hades and the Sirens are a dark passage of the Odyssey reflecting
the pain and wisdom of Type Four. Longing, envy, and regret are
seductive emotions from which some can never escape. But these
emotions also bring us the unvarnished truth about our own needs
and pains if we are brave enough to receive it. And facing these
important emotions is an important part of the journey home to
the true self.

The Type Four Personality Structure
LOCATED AT THE LOWER-RIGHT CORNER of the Enneagram symbol, Fours
belong to the “heart-based” triad associated with the core emotion of
sadness or grief. While Type Twos are in conflict with their sadness and

Threes underdo grief, habitually numbing out their feelings so they don’t
get in the way of their goals, fours overdo an attachment to grief. The three
heart types also share a central concern with image—a self-consciousness
about how they might appear in the eyes of others. While all three types in
this triad have a formative, underlying need to be “seen,” they each act this
out differently based on the ideals they try to fulfill in order to be
recognized and appreciated by others.

The sadness at the core of the heart type personalities reflects their
feeling of not being loved for who they are and their grief over having lost
touch with their real selves because they’ve disowned who they really are
and created a specific image to try to get the love (or approval) they need.
All three heart types have core issues related to unmet needs to be deeply
seen, accepted, and loved for who they are. Their respective coping
strategies are designed to gain approval from other people in three distinct
ways as a substitute for the love they seek but fear or believe they can’t get
as they are. While Twos strive to have a likable, pleasing image, and Threes
create an image of achievement and success, Fours present themselves as
unique and special.
In many ways, Type Fours are the most comfortable of all the types with
the experience of emotions. They value connections with others based on
authentic feelings. A Type Four’s relationship to their emotions is both
primary and complicated, as the Four coping strategy involves an
attachment to some emotions as a protection against the experience of
others. As Naranjo points out, while Type Threes identify with an idealized
image of the self, Fours identify with that part of the psyche that “fails to fit
the idealized image, and is always striving to achieve the unattainable.”6 As

part of the “heart triad,” of which Type Three is the “core point,” Type Four
individuals express a version of the Type Three passion of vanity in wanting
to be seen and loved by others; but Fours’ desire for admiration leads to a
sense of failure because of an inner sense of “scarcity and worthlessness.”7

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Four
Most Fours report having suffered some sort of actual or perceived loss of
love early in life. Things usually started out well, but at some specific point
in time the Four child experienced some sort of abandonment or
deprivation, and to make sense of this loss—and to achieve some sense of
control in light of it—the young Four unconsciously became convinced that
they somehow caused it. While this is almost never true in reality, it gives
the Four child a feeling that they can do something to regain what was lost
through their own efforts, even while their mistaken sense that something
about them caused the rejection persists as a inner sense of unredeemable
deficiency.
To cope with the pain of this loss, Fours adopt a strategy of focusing on
and longing for that which was lost, and at the same time making
themselves “bad” as a way of explaining and controlling it. They dream of
finding an idealized, special love connection that will make up for or
reverse their loss. But because they can’t help feeling hopeless about ever
regaining what they lost—both as a natural response to feeling deprived and
a defense against being disappointed again—they often get stuck in feelings
of grief, melancholy, and shame, which makes it difficult or impossible for
them to really open up to receiving the love they long for.
The memory of something valuable that was lost also causes Fours to
dwell on the past and continue to mourn what they once had. As Naranjo
explains, “unlike other people who forget and resign themselves, [Type
Fours] harbor a keen sense of ‘lost paradise.’”8
Fours thus end up seeing themselves as “not good enough” to be loved as
a way of defending against opening up to the possibility of love, because
allowing themselves to hope for love leaves them vulnerable to the worst
kind of pain: the re-experience of that early loss, and the confirmation of
their worthlessness that goes with it. They dwell in painful feelings of
hopelessness and melancholy to protect themselves from the sadness and
shame that comes from believing they are essentially unlovable and so will
never get the love they need and want.

At the same time, Fours can’t help yearning for an ideal or special kind
of love and recognition that will prove they are worthy after all. Looking
for an idealized love connection that will redeem their inner sense of lack
quells the sense of shame they may feel as a result of the sense that their
inadequacy somehow caused their initial experience of loss. But even while
they fantasize about being loved as a way to soothe themselves, they thwart
their attempts to receive love in the real world because they are so
convinced that they aren’t worthy of actually being loved. They tend to
pursue unattainable people and engage in “push-pull” patterns in
relationships: they idealize and move toward the perfect partner in fantasy,
but reject the possibility of connection in actuality when they perceive the
reality of it as too mundane or flawed.
Overidentification with feelings of hopelessness and melancholy,
together with the search for confirmation that they are special or superior,
distracts Fours from the real way out of their particular defensive trap:
actively taking the risk of hoping for real love and opening up to receive it.
While they long for the love and acceptance they need, Fours habitually
prevent themselves from realizing their quest for love because their false
self (personality) firmly believes they can’t get what they are looking for.
All of the Enneagram personality types put up defensive obstacles to
attaining what they need out of a fear of repeating the experience of the
early pain of not getting it. Fours do this by harboring negative beliefs
about themselves and over-identifying with feelings related to loss or
abandonment, closing themselves off from the possibility of finding
satisfying and nurturing relationships. Allowing for the possibility of being
loved for who they are feels like a dangerous setup for further loss and
further shame-inducing experiences.
For non-Fours, the Four coping strategy can seem counterintuitive, as it
rests on feeling bad about yourself as a way to avoid feeling worse about
yourself. As Naranjo points out, this is a strategy of “seeking happiness
through pain.” By hiding out in suffering, by having a need to suffer, Fours
distract themselves from the inner work they would need to do to open up
to receiving what they really want—what they incorrectly, but defensively,
believe they can’t have.
Grace, a Type Four, describes her childhood situation and the
development of her coping strategy:

My first critical loss of safety and holding occurred in my early
infancy. At ten days old, while being fed, I aspirated, turned blue,
and almost died. I was rushed to the hospital and spent the night
in the ICU.
The fifth child of seven, I was two and a half when the twins were
born. Up until then, I had enjoyed a lot of love and attention as
the first girl after four boys. I have a picture of my mother sitting
on the edge of the bed with two infants in her arms while I stand
nearby with my face contorted, desperately looking up at her,
confused and heartbroken. She’s turned away from me, offering a
strained smile for the camera.
With two infants to tend to, my mother was too busy for me; my
day in the sun was over. I was no longer the object of her love and
adoration. With six siblings vying for attention, and both my
parents overwhelmed and distracted, I learned early on to
suppress my sensitivity and needs. On the outside I was
independent and assertive. On the inside I was painfully insecure
and felt a lot of shame. I had to develop a thick skin and use my
anxiety and anger to be heard amongst the chaos and to protect
my tender heart.

The Main Type Four Defense Mechanism: Introjection
Introjection is the Four’s primary defense mechanism. It is a psychological
defense through which Fours internalize painful feelings as a way to protect
themselves. As psychologist Nancy McWilliams explains, “Introjection is
the process whereby what is outside is misunderstood as coming from
inside.”9 Introjection is the inverse of projection, the primary defense
mechanism of Type Six.
Introjection operates as a defense mechanism by allowing an individual
to identify with and “swallow” another person whole. When you “introject”
someone, you take that person inside you, and whatever that person
represents to you becomes part of your identity. Through introjection, you
give yourself a feeling of being able to control that person and whatever
they do or stand for. For instance, if someone important criticizes you and
you introject that person, you now experience that person’s criticism as
coming from inside yourself. And while you are still being criticized, at

least you have a sense of control—the illusion that you can do something
about it—since the critic is now a part of you. What was coming from the
outside is now coming from the inside, giving you the feeling that you can
manage it instead of being subject to it (or being a passive victim of it).
The appeal of this usually unconscious process is the implicit desire to
exercise more control over the whole interaction. If we have been criticized,
through introjection we can both take charge of the criticism and try to do
better.
In seeing how this defense operates, we can gain insight into something
we all do: take what we experienced as being done to us early on and do it
to ourselves. If you were criticized, you criticize yourself. If your needs
weren’t met, you neglect your own needs. For type Fours, this means that
they continue to subject themselves to experiences that were painful from
the inside, both as a way of taking it in and trying to manage it and as an
effort to protect themselves from being reinjured in a similar way.

The Type Four Focus of Attention
Fours primarily focus their attention on their internal experience, their
emotions, the emotions of others, and interpersonal connection and
disconnection. I once asked a Four whether she put her attention more on
herself or more on others, and she said she put her attention “on the space
between us.” That said, Fours are more self-referencing than otherreferencing, meaning their attention is aimed more at their own inner
experience than at what is going on with other people. At the same time,
Fours naturally tune in to the state of their connections and to their
perception of the underlying emotional tone or status of their relationships.
Fundamentally, Fours focus on thinking about and expressing what they
are feeling. Fours also focus on what others may be thinking or feeling
about them, and whether or not they are achieving authentic connections
with the people around them. While Fours have an innate gift for being able
to sense and appreciate a wide range of emotions, Fours can focus too much
on their own feeling state at times, and they have the tendency to get lost in
a narrow band of emotions—especially feelings of loss, longing, sadness,
melancholy, or hopelessness. By paying a lot of attention to what they are
feeling, they tend to over-identify with their emotions, and when absorbed
in this way, they may find it difficult to shift their attention to other aspects
of their experience.

In relation to others, Fours have a tendency to both feel like a misfit and
want to stand out as unique and special. Focusing on the ways in which they
don’t fit in can lead to fantasies of being judged negatively and found
lacking, and focusing on being special often leads to fantasies of garnering
praise from important people for their unique qualities.
Fours also tend to focus on what is missing in any given situation. In a
relationship or in a specific circumstance, like a job or a class or a social
gathering, Fours will automatically focus on what they see as ideal and
absent—on what is missing that would make the situation better or what
isn’t working well because something specific is lacking.
Sometimes Fours can get stuck either focusing on the outer world or on
their inner world; they may find it difficult to switch back and forth. They
frequently become preoccupied with a sense of envy: comparing themselves
with others, thinking about what others have that they don’t have, and
focusing on their imagined deficiencies (while sometimes attributing this
perception to others). Alternatively, they may also become fixated on their
inner state and over-identify with specific feelings. They may then have
difficulty with shifting their attention to other aspects of their experience,
especially more positive emotions and perspectives.
In line with this, sometimes the Four might think, “If the outside
environment would just give me what I need, things would be better.” In the
face of feelings of dissatisfaction, they often lack a sense of agency. It may
feel hard to them to change their feelings or the world through their own
efforts or force of will. While they tend to focus on what isn’t working, it
can be hard for them to take action, even though taking action might help
them break them out of the focus of attention that is holding them hostage.
Creating drama can also be a way that Fours amplify what they feel is
going wrong as a way of distracting themselves from painful emotional
truths. They may also create drama because they don’t like to pay attention
to what seems mundane or ordinary. They can inject drama into everyday
experiences or the expression of their emotional state as a way of amping
up the mundane aspects of life that may depress them or make them feel
ordinary or deprived. Because of this, others may find Fours excessively
dramatic.
Finally, Fours tend to focus on the past. They may replay old hurts or
disappointing experiences over and over again, and they may dwell on
pivotal moments in their own history as a way of explaining what they see

as their suboptimal state in the present. One Four friend of mine used to
return again and again to talking about how his parents set his life on a
negative course when they denied him the opportunity to become a
professional golfer. He found solace or a distraction from his own lack of
effort in believing that if only that condition of his life had been different—
if only someone else hadn’t held him back—his whole life would have been
better.

The Type Four Emotional Passion: Envy
Envy is the passion of Type Four, and it organizes the personality around a
sense that what is valued and needed is outside of you and somehow
unavailable. Envy grows out of a sense of personal deficiency—a belief that
“others have something that I want that I don’t have.” Fours can also have a
perception that “things come easily to other people, but not to me.”
This tendency to compare themselves with others contributes to Fours’
painful sense of lack and shame. Naranjo points out that while the
emotional state of envy is an understandable reaction to early frustration
and deprivation, Fours’ envy ends up being a self-frustrating factor in the
psyche, because the intense “craving for love that it entails never answers
the chronic sense of inner scarcity and badness, but on the contrary,
stimulates further frustration and pain.”10
This sense of envy contributes to a longing for love and acceptance on
the one hand and a sense of shame for needing and not feeling worthy of
love on the other. Fours’ sense of inner lack also contributes to a painful
cycle in that it intensifies their sense that something good—and outside of
them—must be sought and gained, even as they believe that they don’t
deserve or can’t attain what is needed because they are somehow deficient.
Envy thus keeps Fours focused on what they don’t have, and this focus
fuels their sense of lack, which only perpetuates their envy.
The specific experience and expression of envy in Fours, however,
differs by subtype. The Social Four dwells in a sense of deficiency and
shame heightened by actively envying others; the Self-Preservation Four
denies envy by strenuously pursuing whatever is seen as lacking; and the
Sexual Four gets competitive, striving to prove themselves as superior, in
response to feeling envious.

The Type Four Cognitive Mistake:
“I Dream of Getting the Love I Won’t Ever Have”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and this continues even after the mental models that
create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore.12 While the passion
shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation”
preoccupies the personality’s thought processes.

Type Fours’ cognitive mistake centers on the underlying belief that they
are lacking in some important quality that would make them worthy of love.
Fours hold beliefs and ideas related a sense of personal deficiency and the
inevitability that they will be rejected or abandoned because they are
flawed. These beliefs, which act as organizing principles for the personality,
structure Fours’ experience and expectations.
If you believe that you are lacking in important personal traits that would
make you attractive and acceptable to others (and thus worthy of love), then
it logically follows that you won’t want to risk rejection or abandonment by
opening up to being loved. If you expect others to reject or abandon you—if
you anticipate negative results—you end up creating an external reality that
confirms your negative expectations.13
Here are some key beliefs and assumptions characteristic of the Type
Four personality that support the passion of envy:

I am lacking some essential qualities of goodness, and so I will
inevitably be rejected or abandoned by others.

Since I lost the love of someone I loved and needed in the past,
it must mean there’s something fundamentally wrong with me.
Others have what I want, but I can’t get it because there’s
something wrong with me.
What I want eludes me, and what I can have seems somehow
boring or lacking something essential. What is here and now is
mundane and boring; what I desire most is ideal and at a
distance.
If someone does love me or want to be with me, there must be
something wrong with them.
My intensity makes me special.
What I most want is love, but I won’t be able to get what I
want because (experience has proven) I am not lovable.
I lack some basic attributes that would allow others to really
love me. But if I could find the ideal person who realizes how
special I am, then maybe I could really experience what I long
for.
I am special, but others don’t recognize it.
No one understands me. I am destined to be misunderstood.
I will never be able to fit in because I’m unique (or special or
deficient). I feel as if I don’t belong.
I expect that eventually, most people will abandon me.
These common Four beliefs and recurring thoughts support and
perpetuate the Four’s worldview that they can’t have what they most want.
They typically have many different flavors of self-rejecting thoughts. A
belief in your own inner deficiency can’t help but perpetuate feelings of
hopelessness, melancholy, or depression. Given these beliefs, it makes
sense that Fours both search for the love that will prove them wrong and
prevent themselves from being open to love in case they are proved right.

The Type Four Trap:
“Envy Fuels a Craving for Something You Don’t Let Yourself
Have”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Four
leads the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the
limitations of the personality can’t resolve.
Naranjo states that in Type Fours, “love is sought as a compensation for a
lack of self-love, a condition of intense, chronic self-rejection and
frustration.”14 But while Fours seek love as a way of regaining what was
originally lost—motivated by a fantasy that it will finally provide proof of
their worth and specialness—their firm belief in their own lack won’t allow
them to take in the love they think might redeem them.
Type Fours paradoxically “seek happiness through pain”15 and get
trapped in the various ways they generate pain as a defense against the fear
of not getting the happiness they want. And while they long for love and
understanding, they habitually prevent themselves from receiving the love
they seek—rejecting themselves as unworthy, invalidating the love they do
get, creating drama and suffering as obstacles to healthy relationships, and
proactively abandoning their efforts before they are abandoned.

The Key Type Four Traits
Inferior Self-Image

It may be clear already how envy sets the stage for the Four’s tendency to
have an inferior self-image. Believing goodness exists on the outside means
that Fours view themselves as lacking important and positive traits and
qualities. Their sense of goodness or satisfaction as something that has been
or is being withheld from them leaves them with a sense of unworthiness on
the inside.
These beliefs develop early on in Fours in response to real circumstances,
and they also evolve throughout their lives as a kind of protection against
hoping that the situation will change for the better. An inferior self-image
operates as a kind of protection within the personality because it defends
against new and surprising revelations of your own lack: if you already
believe you aren’t worthy, you won’t be confronted with the unexpected
and painful experience of further rejection or frustration.

Focus on Suffering

Naranjo explains that Fours have “a need to suffer.” Fours’ pattern of
hoping they will earn or attract love through their pain results in a tendency
to be masochistic or to (unconsciously) move toward painful experiences.
Fours’ focus on suffering can serve several purposes within their
personality. It can, as Naranjo suggests, represent an unconscious hope that
through suffering, they will attract the attention and compassionate love of a
parent or other important person who will appreciate their depth of feeling
and unique brand of sensitivity. The hope may be that if someone can
understand the way the Four has suffered, the Four will be rewarded with a
special kind of understanding and appreciation.
Suffering can also function as a defense in that if you are already focused
on a specific source of suffering, you can avoid or distract yourself from a
deeper source of suffering. If you are already hopeless, you won’t be
disappointed or shocked by bad news. This is depression as a defense: if
you are preoccupied with feeling bad about not being understood in a
specific situation, you won’t notice and suffer your more profound sense of
inadequacy or the lack of love in your life.
Suffering can also be an expression of the Four’s unique capacity to feel
things deeply and to endure pain and to comfort themselves through making
contact with their pain. The archetype of the artist who suffers for his art, or
the romantic poet on a tragic quest for unrequited love, creates something
beautiful and special out of the experience of pain, and is thus redeemed or
valued for his or her ability to suffer (and express that suffering through
art).
Emotional Sensitivity and Empathic Ability

Along with Type Twos, Fours are the most emotional of the Enneagram
personalities. In contrast to Twos, however, Fours tend to be more
introverted and are sometimes more intellectual. Fours are also more likely
to feel and be comfortable feeling a wider range of emotions, including hate
and anger, whereas Twos repress these feelings out of a persistent desire to
avoid offending others.
Fours value emotional intensity and authenticity, they tend to feel
emotions deeply, and they find more comfort in feelings like melancholy or
sadness than most other types do. According to the Four perspective,
emotions point to the inherent depth and truth of your experience of

yourself, and so authentic emotions shouldn’t be denied, as they reflect
what is special and uniquely you.
Perhaps more than any other Enneagram type, Fours possess the gift of
empathy. They make great therapists and friends for people who might need
emotional support. Unlike some other personalities, who may urge you to
“look on the bright side” when you are feeling down, Fours have the
experience and the emotional courage to be with darker emotions like
sadness and pain. Fours have a natural comfort with a wide range of
feelings, from joy to rage to fear to sadness, though of course they may
avoid feeling some of their emotions for defensive reasons at times. Their
ability to feel their own feelings at a deep level gives them both a
familiarity with and an understanding of the intense emotional experiences
of others.
Fours also automatically tune into the emotional level of social
interactions—they have the natural ability to intuit what is happening below
the surface of things on a deeper, emotional level.
Aesthetic Sensibility

Fours have a natural ability to see the aesthetic qualities and possibilities of
a given situation. Both because they have an emotion-based disposition and
because they have an affinity for artistic process as a way of communicating
emotional truth, Fours easily see the beauty inherent in things. The
archetype of the Four also resembles that of the suffering artist who sees the
beauty in pain and uses his sense of the tragic and the romantic to express
deep feeling through artistic creation.
Push-Pull Pattern in Relationships

Fours typically demonstrate a “push-pull” pattern in relationships. When a
loved one is at a distance, the Four idealizes that person, focusing on what
is positive and pleasing about the loved one and longing to be with them.
However, when that same person comes close—when the person is relating
to them intimately in the present moment, right in front of them, on a
regular basis—the Four then typically focuses on what is missing or
undesirable or even intolerable in the person, and feels motivated to push
them away. This “push” part of the pattern represents a proactive
abandonment or rejection based on a fear of abandonment and rejection,
which can be experienced as a straightforward aversion to the partner. The
“pull” portion of the pattern represents the tendency to idealize what seems

unavailable or is at a distance and is longed for—and it also represents the
Four’s real desire for closeness, a desire that can seem dangerous once
someone actually comes close to the Four.
This dynamic explains why Fours often feel a deep sense of ambivalence
in relationships: they may both appreciate or love a person and want to be
close to them, but also have an acute perception of what is missing or
flawed about that person, which makes it hard for them to fully embrace
them.

The Type Four Shadow
The Type Four personality itself is a kind of archetypal representation of the
Shadow. Fours typically focus their attention on the kinds of emotional
experiences that other personalities avoid or deny being aware of. Fours
actively feel—and may even take comfort in—feelings like anger,
disappointment, fear, grief, and shame, emotions that most people prefer to
deny or avoid.
In contrast to some of the other personality types, then, Fours’ positive
aspects and attributes represent a big part of their personal Shadow. It is the
good things about themselves that Fours relegate to unconsciousness and
don’t own or see.
One of the main challenges Fours face is that their tendency to focus on
what is missing or lacking in situations can get them stuck in a negative
cycle in which they can’t make the transition to accepting what is satisfying
and “good enough” in the present. They don’t recognize and acknowledge
their own positive qualities, like their capacities for growth (and positive
change), their inherent lovability, and their beauty and power. And because
they focus much of their attention on the past and the future, they tend not
to see and take advantage of what is positive in their immediate, present
lives.
As the passion of Type Four, envy also functions in part within the Four
Shadow in that it creates an illusion of everything “good” being on the
outside. Although many Fours are very conscious of feeling envious, envy
also operates at an unconscious level within the Four personality to
motivate much of what can keep them stuck in a vicious cycle of negativity
and hopelessness. Naranjo describes the unconscious activity of Fours’
envy as an “over-desiring.” Fours’ insatiable desire or hunger for love
grows out of their deeper sense that they have been deprived of the love

they need to survive and their unconscious fear that they are not “good
enough” to be able to deserve it or receive it.16
While the passion of envy may be obvious to the Four, and so not very
“shadowy,” it nonetheless creates an unconscious conflict for Fours that can
be hard to make conscious and resolve: an intense desire for love and
connection from the outside, and a corresponding sense of shamefulness
and inner lack that makes them unable to take in what they need and want
the most. Fours’ tendency to have a poor self-image and focus on suffering
represent unconscious ways they lock themselves into not getting what they
desire, even while they are preoccupied with the need for it and fantasies of
getting it.
In these ways, Fours’ “positive” Shadow—the ways they don’t see, own,
and make conscious the facts that they are just as deserving of love and
capable of being loved as anyone else—keeps them from being able to
access that part of themselves that could more confidently open up to fully
participating in the kind of love connections they dream about. Their
conviction that they are unworthy operates as an unconscious block to
owning and acting upon their inherent lovability and ability to love. As a
result, Fours may not only fail to see their own natural goodness, they may
also take on Shadow aspects of their family or group, unconsciously
carrying the Shadow—the darker feelings and parts of reality that others
don’t want to acknowledge—of the larger collective. And this may intensify
their inability to see themselves in a positive light.
Fours make good targets for unconscious group projections of the
Shadow, not because they are actually bad in some way but because they
are highly sensitive to emotions like grief and pain. They make effective
targets for others’ projections because they can’t help but be aware of—and
voice—the negative aspects that others don’t want to see or own. This is
why many Fours become the “identified patient” in their families. And this
whole dynamic can work to reinforce the Four’s defenses, which in some
ways cause them to take refuge in their “badness” as a way of avoiding the
positive aspects of themselves that might lead them to open up to the
dangerous prospect of being seen and loved.
The Shadow of Type Four Passion: Envy in Dante’s
Underworld

The darker side of the Type Four Passion of Envy can fuels a
focus on competition, superiority, sorrow, and contempt. This
envy is not simply wanting, it is a deep melancholy that reflects a
need to suffer and a vision of life based on what is lacking and
how you stack up against others. In Dante’s Inferno people are
judged mostly for their deeds. In the Inferno, we see the dark side
of envy in Dante’s portrayal of “the Suicides,” who are punished
for going against the natural order of things, indulging their
“laments,” and seeking to escape from scorn by killing
themselves.
Each soul that surrenders to despair in this way becomes a barren
tree in a black underworld forest. These trees are described only
in negatives, and their branches have only thorns. Half humanhalf bird harpies torment them by snapping their twigs and
branches, causing “pain, and for the pain an outlet.”17 These
wounds bleed briefly, releasing pleas for pity from the soul
trapped inside. One shade admits that he killed himself
specifically in reaction to envious slander:
‘That courtesan who constantly surveyed Caesar’s household
with her adulterous eyes, mankind’s undoing, the special
vice of courts, inflamed the hearts of everyone against me,
and these, inflamed, inflamed in turn Augustus, and my
happy honors turned to sad laments. My mind, moved by
scornful satisfaction, believing death would free me from all
scorn, made me unjust to me, who was all just… If one of
you should go back to the world, restore the memory of me,
who here, remain cut down by the blow that Envy gave.’18
Like the shadow side of Type Four, the Suicides do violence to
themselves by making their own pain paramount. One of these
spirits tried to get “scornful satisfaction”19 through winning back
people’s good opinion by ending his life. In this way, we see a
character who copes with looking bad in the eyes of others by
plunging further into misery. It results in an existence that is
dismembodied (because they denied the sanctity of their bodies
on earth) and trapped within itself, emotionally barren and

tormented. Tragically, in the underworld, these shades cannot see
the envy within themselves.

The Three Kinds of Fours:
The Type Four Subtypes
THE PASSION OF TYPE FOUR IS ENVY. All Fours have an exaggerated focus on
suffering (related to envy), but it’s different for each subtype. Fours’
suffering grows out of the habit of comparing themselves to others and
feeling deficient—enviously thinking that something outside of them is
better or more ideal, and experiencing a sense of inner lack. The SelfPreservation Four internalizes and to some extent denies or suppresses
suffering; the Social Four lives in it too much and wears it on his or her
sleeve; and the Sexual Four projects it out onto others to evacuate (and thus
defend against) a painful sense of inferiority.
Naranjo notes that the contrast between the three Four subtypes is among
the most striking of the nine types. The three different Fours vary
significantly from one to another, and so they appear more differentiated
than some of the other subtype groups.
In Fours, according to Naranjo, the passion of envy combines with each
of the three fundamental human instincts to create a situation in which the
Four feels a specific kind of driving need to suffer. Each of the three Type
Four subtypes, then, is motivated by a different need related to suffering:
the Social Fours suffer, the Self-Preservation Fours are long-suffering, and
the Sexual Fours make others suffer.

The Self-Preservation Four: “Tenacity” (Countertype)
The Self-Preservation Four is the countertype of the Four subtypes, and so
it may be difficult to identify this person as a Four. Although this Four
experiences envy like the other Fours, they communicate their envy and
suffering to others less than the other two Four subtypes do. Instead of
talking about their suffering, these Fours are“long-suffering” in the sense of
learning to endure pain without wincing. These Fours are more stoic and
strong in the face of their pain.
Envy is less apparent in the Self-Preservation Four because instead of
dwelling in and expressing envy, this Four works hard to get what others
have that he or she lacks. Instead of hanging out in their longing in a way

that prevents them from taking action, they strive to get “those distant
things” that give them the feeling of being able to obtain that which was
lost. Whatever they get, however, never feels like enough.
Self-Preservation Fours do not communicate sensitivity, suffering,
shame, or envy, though they may feel all these things and they have the
same depth and capacity for feeling as the other Fours. They learn to
swallow a lot without complaining. Endurance is a virtue for them, and they
hope their self-sacrifices will be recognized and appreciated, though they
don’t talk about them very much.
Like the other Fours, Self-Preservation Fours feel a need to suffer in the
unconscious hope that this will bring them love and acceptance; but unlike
the other two, they suffer in silence. Their willingness to suffer without
complaint is their way of seeking redemption and earning love. Thus, this
Four makes a virtue of toughing out difficulties without talking about them,
hoping that others will see this, admire them for it, and help them to meet
their needs. Instead of displaying the need to suffer, they have a tendency to
deny their envy and bear too much suffering and frustration as a result.
As Naranjo explains, the other two Four subtypes are too sensitive to
frustration. They either suffer too much or they make you suffer too much
(as a compensation for their suffering). The Self-Preservation subtype is the
countertype Four because they go to the other extreme, developing a high
capacity to internalize and bear frustration. They make a virtue of resistance
to frustration.
Self-Preservation Fours demand a lot of themselves. They have a strong
need to endure, so they develop an ability to do without. They put
themselves in situations that are tough. They test and challenge themselves.
One of my clients with this subtype says that she “throws herself into the
fire.” These Fours have a passion for effort—they engage in intense
activity, and may often appear strained and tense. They may experience
distress if their activity level slows down, and they can be compulsive about
making efforts to achieve what they need to survive, even if their efforts
don’t take them anywhere. In some cases, they may not know how to live
without the stress and pressure they put on themselves. They don’t allow
themselves the experience of living in or from their fragility.
Just as the (countertype) Self-Preservation Three wants to be seen as
successful but displays humility about the work they do because they
believe outward displays of vanity make them less worthy of respect, Self-

Preservation Fours internalize their suffering and strive to get what they
want in a more autonomous way than the other Four subtypes.
This Four tends to be a humanitarian with an empathic and nurturing
disposition, someone who protests for the sake of others and is sensitive to
the needy, the dispossessed, and victims of injustice. This is their way of
projecting their pain outward, addressing it through others’ suffering instead
talking about their own. They try to take care of others’ pain or work to
ease the “suffering of the world” so they don’t have to fully deal with their
own suffering.
While the other two Four subtypes can be dramatic, the Self-Preservation
Four is more masochistic than melodramatic. For this subtype, masochism
is the ego or personality’s strategy for getting love. Self-Preservation Fours
devalue themselves in important ways, which can make it even tougher for
them to do all the work they do to try to get the security and the love that
they long for. Their attachment to enduring can be seen from the outside as
masochistic, but it stems from a desire to earn love and acceptance through
being strong and resilient. The motivation of this subtype stems from a
desire for the parent to see that the child is not complaining, and instead is
being a good boy or girl through not asking for very much.
These Fours may also masochistically enact a need to prove themselves
by working against themselves: they make efforts to get what they need and
want, but unconsciously work against themselves at the same time. They
can be impulsive, but they will control and inhibit their impulses to get
recognition. They may want to be happy, but they experience an
unconscious taboo around happiness. They spend a lot of energy on being
afraid of what’s happening instead of dealing with problems and making
improvements, so they habitually postpone actions necessary to achieving
what they want and then blame themselves for doing so. They wear
themselves out seeking and striving in ways and places where they know
they’ll fail, which ensures the perpetuation of a cycle of effort and
devaluation. They may be ambitious, but they deny and work against their
own ambitions.
Formerly called “Reckless/Dauntless,” but more recently referred to by
the name “Tenacity,” these Fours move toward activities that require a large
capacity for endurance as a way to earn love, without regard for the pain or
the danger they may entail.

This Four subtype resembles a One or a Three. Self-Preservation Fours’
focus on autonomy, self-sufficiency, and working hard may make them look
like a One; however, this Four feels a wider range of emotions—more ups
and downs—than Ones, even if they don’t always express their feelings.
Self-Preservation Fours can also look like Threes, especially SelfPreservation Threes, in that they work hard to achieve a sense of security
and may be anxious; however, in contrast to Threes, these Fours will often
work at cross-purposes, unintentionally thwarting their own efforts, whereas
Threes tend to achieve what they are working toward. Fours also feel their
emotions more than Threes do.
Interestingly, this subtype can also look like a Type Seven, which in some
ways is the opposite of Type Four, because some Self-Preservation Fours
express a need to be light. With all the enduring and efforting these Fours
do, they may at times display the high energy characteristic of Sevens, and
they may also have a need for fun and playfulness as an escape from having
to tough things out all the time. This may account for the fact that there are
some Fours who do not seem as melancholy as others—Fours that appear
more “sunny” and lighthearted. However, these Fours can be distinguished
from Sevens in their greater access to their emotions.
Marcy, a Self-Preservation Four, speaks:
For much of my life it was difficult for me to feel my true
emotions because they were so buried; it just wasn’t okay to
express emotions when I was growing up—the phrase I
internalized from my childhood was, “Just suck it up and move
on.” Plus, I’ve always had a stubborn streak, as if I’m the only
one who knows how to do something right. My colleagues used to
think I was a One because of my need for perfection. And it has
sometimes been really difficult for me to connect with the passion
of Envy in a meaningful way. But one day when I was thinking of
someone I admired and how I came up short by comparison, and
I heard my internal voice say “You’re not good enough,” I knew I
was a Four. I really got the Envy bit then. Now my emotions arise
more freely, in small impulses and bursts though, not like the
bigger, wilder swings of emotions that you hear about with a lot
of Fours.

Although I’ve meditated for many years, it’s still difficult to relax
and to be calm in daily activity. It just seems like a waste of time
not to be doing or accomplishing something. Even now when I
feel my feelings, I catch myself trying to figure out what I can DO
with them. I’ve always pushed myself to work hard to be
successful because I wanted to prove myself by being really good
at whatever I do and I have been fortunate in being rewarded for
my hard work.
I also see the idea behind the former name of the SelfPreservation Four, Reckless/Dauntless, showing up in my
behavior. In a way that seems counter to “self-preservation” I
have a penchant for spending money to buy fine things and help
others out, sometimes more money than I make. (My mother used
to say that I thought money grew on trees.) It’s like I get this
reckless feeling that money will always be there, so why not spend
it on what I love? Plus, I tend to make snap decisions without
really thinking it through. For instance, I left my job of 18 years
and my 20-year marriage within a month of each other. Of
course, the result was some pretty tough years but at least I began
to feel my feelings!

The Social Four: “Shame”
The Social Four appears emotionally sensitive (or oversensitive), feels
things deeply, and suffers more than most people. For this Four, there is a
desire to be witnessed and seen in their suffering. They hope that if their
suffering is sufficiently recognized and understood, they might be forgiven
for their failures and deficiencies and loved unconditionally.
Naranjo explains that Social Fours are people who lament too much and
who often put themselves in the victim role. They can appear selfsabotaging when they broadcast their suffering and their victimhood as a
way of engendering sympathy in others, but they also undermine
themselves by being too attached to the causes of their suffering.
In this Four, envy fuels a focus on shame and suffering by providing a
constant source of pain: a feeling that others have what the Four wants.
However, they believe that their suffering is also what makes them unique
and special—there is a kind of seduction of others through suffering.

Fours’ motivation for dwelling too much in suffering and sensitivity
seems to be connected to an idea that suffering will be the shortest path to
heaven. Like the child that cries to attract the mother’s care, they have the
idea that the way to happiness is through tears. While there is some truth to
the idea that the path of transformation requires difficulty, this higher ideal
gets put to use in justifying the expression of dissatisfaction as a way of
attracting the help of others. Social Fours rationalize their attachment to
suffering instead of doing something about it, and they depend too much on
their needs being fulfilled by others. They express the idea that if you
convey the intensity of your need in painful enough terms, someone will
finally come to your aid and fulfill that need.
Whereas envy motivates Self-Preservation Fours to work to get what
they want, it motivates Social Fours to focus on their emotional
dissatisfaction and internal lack. For the Social Four there is a sense of
comfort and familiarity in suffering—the sweet sadness of poetry, the rich
meaning and painful beauty in melancholic music—and an unconscious
hope that their suffering will somehow redeem them.
The central issue of the Social Four, however, is not just suffering—it’s
inferiority. For this subtype, there is a need for self-abasement and selfrecrimination, for turning against oneself, for self-weakening. The Social
Four’s envy is expressed through a passion for comparing oneself with
others and winding up in the lowest position. To others, the extremity of
their mindset and insistence that “there’s something wrong with me” can be
surprising. They have a poor self-image that they themselves perpetuate.
They also engage in self-sabotage a lot: they regularly underestimate
themselves and always feel “less than” in comparison to others.
As Naranjo indicates, the Social Four may evoke a response in others that
makes them want to ask, “What’s wrong with you that you think there’s
something wrong with you?” A person with this subtype may be competent,
attractive, and intelligent, and yet still tend to focus on and identify strongly
with suffering and a sense of deficiency.
Social Fours tend to feel a sense of shame about their wants and needs,
and their experience of desire is associated with more guilt than other
people’s. The Social Four feels guilty for any wish. Shame puts their
internal focus on intense and dark emotions such as envy, jealousy, hatred,
and competition. They are too shy to express desires, except through a
display of suffering. They don’t feel entitled to have their needs met but at

the same time may believe that the world is “against” them or that “no one
gives me what I want or what I need.”
Social Fours don’t compete with others (like Sexual Fours do) as much as
they compare themselves to others and find themselves lacking—almost as
if by showing themselves to be lacking they can call forth what they need
from others. Underneath, however, they experience a fierce competitiveness
that may be largely unconscious: a competitiveness for recognition, being
unique and special, and wanting to be in first place. This is more hidden and
subtle in the Social Four, however, than it is in the Sexual Four.
Social Fours explore the pain of the past repeatedly as a way of attracting
someone who will take care of them and satisfy their wants. They
criminalize their wants, as many of us do, but they suffer more keenly for
turning against themselves.
Fours with this subtype tend to think with their emotions—they get
entangled in “emotional” thoughts, caught up in and identified with intense
emotions to the extent that they can’t take action even when it would be
good for them to do so. They tend to be generous and to do for others, but
they do not take responsibility for their own lives and may dramatize
problems to distract themselves from doing something to find a solution.
In public, Social Fours repress “frowned upon” emotions like anger or
hatred and may appear sweet, friendly, and soft—but in private, they may
express the emotions they store up in social situations and become
aggressive. Generally, they prefer to swallow their own poison rather than
externalize it to the people around them, and they typically have difficulty
finding their place in a group and in society. These Fours may experience
themselves as misfits, and yet they also tend to generate social situations of
rejection to confirm their shame. They see themselves as victims and may
view others as “perpetrators,” and they don’t always take responsibility for
their own actions or aggressiveness.
Social Fours are less likely to be mistaken for other Enneagram types
than the other two Four subtypes, but they can look like Sixes in their focus
on what’s missing or wrong in their lives. However, unlike Sixes, they have
a desire to be special (as opposed to Type Six’s identification with the
“everyman”), and they spend less time in fear and more time feeling
emotions related to sadness, pain, and shame.
Elizabeth, a Social Four, speaks:

I’ve been called “hyper-sensitive” my entire life. My feelings
have always been so easily hurt—even at the tender ages of three
and four I often felt terribly misunderstood or forsaken. I
remember crying in my room at four years old racking my brain
trying to figure out what was going on such that my family didn’t
get me and could be so hurtful. I came to believe that there was
something wrong with me and that I didn’t matter. These have
remained bedrock beliefs for much of my life.
Feeling different, misunderstood, and dejected were my constant
companions and felt like home. Over time, I developed an
attraction and attachment to my pain and suffering because that’s
what feels most real and resonant with the pervasive sense that
something is really wrong (with me or the world around me.)
Experiencing my pain leads to feeling more connected with
myself, which then alleviates the pain of feeling disconnected and
misunderstood. Thus when a dark feeling hits, my impulse is to
hang out with it and get to the bottom of it. And I tend to get
irritated and feel even more misunderstood when people suggest
lightening up, getting some exercise, or going to see a funny
movie. Melancholy has always been my favorite feeling. Not only
is it comforting in and of itself, but it creates a portal to my
depths, my creativity, and a feeling of being at home in myself.
Despite the tremendous amount of positive feedback I have
received in so many areas of my life, I still wrestle with a poor
self-image every day. My friends, loved ones, and associates are
always shocked to discover the discrepancies between how they
view me and how I view myself. As a student, I was always
surprised to get my papers and tests back with very high grades
and glowing comments. And even now when I share my creative
or professional work I am startled to hear the heartfelt positive
feedback from others. My barometer for assessing the quality of
my work in any area is greatly skewed toward “this could have
been a lot better.” And then it’s back to “Poor me—I have a
broken barometer, can you help me fix it?”

The Sexual Four: “Competition”

In the Sexual Four subtype, the inner motivation is envy, and its
manifestation as competition. These Fours don’t feel consciously envious so
much as they feel competitive as a way of muting the pain associated with
envy. If they can compete against another person they perceive as having
more than they do and win, they can feel better about themselves.
Sexual Fours believe it’s good to be the best. Most people want to present
a good image to others, but Sexual Fours don’t care very much about image
management or being liked. For them, it’s better to be superior. They are
highly competitive, and their intense focus on competition takes the form of
actively striving to show that they are the best.
People with this subtype tend to have an “all or nothing” belief related to
success: if success is not all theirs, they are left with nothing. This pattern
leads to excesses related to their efforts to achieve success, and it also
generates feelings of hate.
Sexual Fours are usually arrogant, despite having an underlying sense of
inferiority. In the face of the pain of feeling misunderstood, an arrogant
attitude is adopted as overcompensation—a means of being recognized.
These Fours like to be part of “chosen” group, and they can be very elitist.
They may refuse to feel indebted to anyone, and they may have the sense
that they have the exclusive right to feel offended by the lack of
consideration of others. Any criticism or reproach is seen as an affront or
disqualification.
Envious anger dominates the expression of this subtype’s unconscious
instinctual impulses. Sexual Fours’ deeper instinctual motivation is about a
refusal to suffer the pain brought about by envy, and a need to reduce
suffering by projecting the responsibility for meeting their needs onto others
and minimizing others’ accomplishments in comparison with their own.
Sexual Fours “make others suffer” because they feel that they have been
made to suffer and so need some sort of compensation. They may seek to
hurt or punish others as an unconscious way of repudiating or minimizing
their own pain. Naranjo observes that this tendency of this Four can be
summed up by the phrase, “Hurt people hurt people.” Externalizing pain
helps them ease their inner sense of inferiority. Their relationship to
suffering can thus best be understood as a refusal to suffer. This gets
expressed as an active insistence on their needs being validated and met.
(They want with anger.) More shameless than shameful, Sexual Fours are
vocal about expressing their needs; they rebel against any shame connected

to their desires. This subtype follows the life philosophy that “the squeaky
wheel gets the grease.”
When others experience Sexual Fours as demanding, this can lead to a
pattern of rejection and anger: Sexual Fours get mad when others don’t
meet their needs, but their demanding nature causes people to avoid or
reject them, and then they get angry about being rejected. This type can thus
get trapped in a vicious cycle when rejection leads to protest and protest
leads to rejection.
The Sexual Four is more assertive and angrier than the other subtypes.
Naranjo refers to this Four as the “mad Four” as opposed to the “sad”
(Social) Four. These Fours can be very outspoken with their anger because
expression of anger is their way of defending against painful feelings.
When they unconsciously turn their pain into anger, they don’t have to feel
their pain anymore.
These Fours may even seek to hurt or punish others as a way of
repudiating or minimizing their underlying pain. They feel justified in
pointing to others as the source of their own deprivation or frustration,
which serves as both a distraction from their own role in their suffering and
a plea for help and understanding.
Naranjo says that this Four subtype can be the angriest personality among
the Enneagram types. They may express envious anger as a way to establish
or assert power when they feel inferior at a deeper level, which can be a
way to manipulate situations to their advantage. (This kind of anger was the
impulse behind the French revolution: “I envy the rich, so I’ll organize a
revolution.”) And Sexual Fours can be very impulsive. They want things
immediately and have little tolerance for frustration.
Naranjo calls this type “Competition,” and Ichazo called it “Hate.” While
this type can be both hateful and competitive, it is important to remember
that the competition and hate expressed by this Four represents a deeper
need to project their sense of suffering and inadequacy outward. The painful
sense of envy felt by the Sexual Four can motivate a wishing with anger, or
a sense of “I’ve got to get what I need, both to convince myself that my
needs aren’t shameful, and to feel better about myself with respect to
others.” Their competitiveness and anger is a compensation for and a
defense against the hurt they feel underneath.
These Fours like and need emotional intensity. Without intensity,
everything can seem unbearably dull and boring. When Sexual Fours want

somebody’s love, they can be very direct about asking for what they need,
or they can become “extraordinary”—make themselves seem special and
attractive and superior—in an effort to attract it. In line with their natural
intensity (fueled by both their heart-based emotional temperament and their
sexual instinct), these individuals tend to be more present and available in
relationships because they don’t deny or avoid many of the factors that can
inhibit others relationally, like anger, neediness, competitiveness, arrogance,
and having to be liked all the time. However, at times it may prove difficult
for them to maintain a loving attitude because they confuse sweetness and
benevolence with being false or insincere.
Sexual Fours are most likely to be confused with Type Eights or Sexual
Twos. Like Eights, they have easier access to anger than most types, but
they differ from Eights in the wider range of emotions they regularly feel.
Naranjo points out that Eights often don’t need to get angry, whereas this
Four frequently feels misunderstood or envious, so they may show anger
more often. They can also look like Sexual “Aggressive-Seductive” Twos
(because both types can be aggressive and seductive in relationships), but
the Sexual Two is more oriented toward pleasing others.
Roger, a Sexual Four, speaks:
The all-too-cumbersome online tests often report I am an Eight or
a Three, but I know full well that I am a Sexual Four. My greatest
friend in the world, my Type Five elder sister, once leaned over at
an Enneagram workshop and underlined the word “hostility” in a
description of the Sexual Four with her finger and told me, “You
need to work on that.” I had to listen to her feedback because she
has known me my entire life and so must be a reliable reporter. Of
course, I had a finger to offer her regarding the work I thought
she might have yet to address in her own life.
Instead of feeling anything vulnerable in my personal life, I will
often go to anger. Instead of experiencing myself as ordinary or
less-than in my professional life, I will often go to competition,
aggression, or even hostility. I don’t relate to the descriptions of
the over-sensitive, complaining (Social) Four: I go after my
enemies or perceived adversaries who I feel threatened by directly
rather than hanging out too long in discomfort. I also go after my

objects of desire directly, and there are many. It may seem
Threeish and Eightish that I need to be on top professionally and
personally. But although I pride myself on being direct and honest
rather than nice, I know I am not an Eight because my Focus of
Attention and my Achilles Heel is definitely Envy; it invigorates
me to go after what I want (or take down the person who got what
I didn’t get). I know I am not a Three because I take more pride in
being one-of-a-kind than in being successful. I own that I can
come across as arrogant and even hostile if I feel threatened. This
has not always served me well in either personal or professional
relationships and this kind of response saddens me. Luckily, I
have learned the value of staying with the softer feelings,
experiencing my vulnerability, being with a great partner, and
being one amongst many.

“The Work” for Type Four:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS FOURS WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of seeking—but blocking—love to prove their
worth by seeing what is good in themselves and not just what’s missing;
taking the risk to believe in their own lovability; and opening up to receive
the love and understanding they long for.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Fours, this process involves observing the ways in which
they devalue themselves to justify defending against the love they want;
exploring the ways they get stuck in envy, shame, and inferiority; and
making active efforts to see what is positive in the present as a way to allow
themselves to open up to the good things that are available to them. It is
particularly important for them to learn to stop believing in their own inner
lack, to understand how they thwart their own efforts to achieve happiness,
and to rise above their emotional defenses to open up to what they really
want.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Fours can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their

personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Fours take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Holding on to a strong belief in your own deficiency such that you close yourself off from others (and
love and goodness) in the expectation of abandonment

Observe your tendency to engage in intense self-criticism and even selfloathing. What kinds of thoughts and beliefs do you have about yourself?
What kinds of things do you tell yourself about yourself on a regular basis?
Note all the ways in which you buy into and perpetuate negative beliefs
about yourself and your worth. Notice if you engage in self-criticism and
self-abasement, what that looks like, and how and when it happens.
Observe the ways in which you focus on your flaws and devalue or dismiss
compliments and positive feedback. Recognize the ways in which you
generate negative feelings about yourself based on your own negative view
of yourself and what you perceive as your flaws and deficiencies. Notice if
you view yourself as special or unique or superior as a way of defensively
compensating for a deeper belief in your inadequacy. Note the way this may
be a back-and-forth pattern that doesn’t shift, which ends up reinforcing
your underlying belief in your own unworthiness.
Distracting yourself in various ways from your own growth and expansion through your attachment
to various emotions

Observe the ways in which you create suffering for yourself through
negative thoughts about who you are and then dwell in that suffering as a
way to distract yourself from taking action to address the causes of your
suffering. Notice if you use depression as a defense—if you focus on the
hopelessness of things as a way to avoid deeper kinds of pain or won’t do
anything to generate hope and a more positive outlook. Look out for what
you are avoiding when you get attached to your sadness. Observe any

tendencies you have to amp up your emotions or create drama as a way of
avoiding inner emptiness or grappling with the realities of your life. Notice
if you avoid dealing with what’s happening in the present by devaluing it as
boring or mundane.
Focusing on what’s missing such that nothing measures up and nothing can be taken in

Observe the way your attention habitually goes to what is missing in any
given situation. Notice if this helps you to improve things such that you
benefit from what’s happening, or if it functions as an excuse to dismiss or
devalue what is happening or as a way to avoid constructively engaging
with your present reality. Observe the ways in which you apply this to
people and generate ambivalence, distancing yourself or thwarting potential
connections by focusing on others’ flaws. Notice if you get stuck in
ambivalence by focusing on what isn’t good enough. Observe the ways in
which you focus on the past as a way of devaluing what’s happening in the
present. Notice any push-pull patterns you see in your relationships, and
think about why you push and why you pull. Note how you fixate on what’s
missing and “throw the baby out with the bath water” such that you don’t
take in the good parts of a situation or a relationship.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection:
Gathering More Data to Expand Your Self-Knowledge
As Fours observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Fours can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider, to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns.
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Fours cope?

In understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how they
operate as coping strategies, Fours have the opportunity to become more
aware of how and why they undermine their ability to get the love they
want. If Fours can tell the story of their early life and look for ways that
indentifying with a negative sense of self, getting attached to particular
feelings, and focusing on what’s missing helped them to cope, they can
begin to have more compassion for themselves and see how these patterns
have operated to protect them. Generating insights into why they developed
these patterns in the first place, and how these patterns work as defenses but
also keep them stuck in their “acorn shell,” can help Fours challenge their
assumptions and pave the way for a more expansive view of themselves and
their ability to grow beyond the limited perspective that keeps them
trapped.
What painful emotions are the Type Four patterns designed to protect me from?

For Fours, answering these questions means looking at how they overidentify with some feelings to avoid or deny others. It will be important for
them to ask themselves if being attached or over-involved with
hopelessness and melancholy serves as a way for them to hold themselves
in a familiar emotional space and at the same time avoid confronting a
deeper experience of pain at not getting the love they needed. If hanging out
in hopelessness or sadness is operating as a defense, what are these
emotions actually defending you from feeling? Having the courage to locate
and feel these deeper emotions can help to set Fours free from the defensive
over-identification with emotions that keeps them stuck in a cycle of
depression and longing. If you are amping up certain feelings or creating
drama to distract yourself from what you’re feeling at a more fundamental
level, what is going on deeper down? Investigating their emotional territory
in this way can be an important way for Fours to help themselves see
through the potentially tricky ways they use some emotions as a defense
against others.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Four patterns operate in me now?

By reflecting on how these patterns operate, the three kinds of Fours can
begin to have a greater awareness of how their defensive patterns surface in
everyday life—and in the present moment. If Fours can consciously catch

themselves in the act of focusing on what isn’t working and how they don’t
measure up, they can become more aware of the ways they rationalize not
opening up to love and acceptance. If they can explore the reasons why they
get stuck in ambivalence, they can wake up to the deeper defensive
motivations that keep them fixated in a pattern of actively not allowing in
what they enviously see as missing. It is important for Fours to see—in real
time—how they erect barriers to receiving the understanding and
acceptance they yearn for, and how this contributes to a vicious cycle when
they then feel hopeless about getting it.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Fours keep themselves from seeing?

To really increase their self-knowledge, it will be important for Fours to
remind themselves (repeatedly) about what they don’t see when their
personality is driving the show. Fours pay so much attention to what is
lacking—in themselves, in other people, and in the good things that come to
them—that they habitually avoid seeing all that’s not missing, all the quality
and value and goodness inherent in their selves and in others. If you have
blind spots where your beauty, goodness, and power should be, how can
you develop the confidence and faith in yourself to take action to get what
you need and want? If you don’t recognize the potential in others, give them
credit for their good points, and appreciate the way they make efforts to
love you even though they aren’t perfect, how can you be receptive to the
good stuff others want to give you? By focusing on what isn’t there, you
blind yourself to all that is there.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The irony of the Four coping strategy is that by idealizing what you want as
perfect and perpetually distant, you cut yourself off from getting what you
want in everyday life. By dwelling on your own inadequacies, you convince
yourself that you aren’t good enough to get what you want and
unconsciously prevent yourself from attaining it—your beliefs shape your
reality. By over-identifying with certain emotions, you distract yourself
from taking action to get what you need and want (and believing that’s
possible). Although you focus much attention on what, exactly, you want—
and fantasize about the ways you might get it—your beliefs about the ideal
conditions necessary for actually taking it in might not exist in the real

world. As a result, even though you focus a lot of energy on longing for
what you want, you unconsciously but actively frustrate your own efforts
and keep yourself from getting what you want.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to actively think, feel, and act with more choice
and awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Fours of “what to
do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns associated with your
core type described above in the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use
the enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines as a map of growth, and 3) how to
study your passion (or “Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite,
the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Four Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Holding on to a strong belief in your own deficiency such that you
close yourself off from others (and love/goodness) in the
expectation of abandonment
Challenge your unwavering belief in your inferiority. Only by becoming aware of their

vicious cycle of envy and need and inferiority and shame can Fours step out
of the defensive patterns of thinking, feeling and acting they engage in that
become self-reinforcing and self-frustrating. As long as Fours believe so
strongly in their own inferiority, they can’t realize and embrace the essential
truth of their own goodness and lovability. By noticing, exploring, and then
actively challenging this belief, Fours can realize it’s a false belief and start
to believe not in their own superiority, which is the other pole of this Four
pattern, but in their own “goodenough-ness.” By consciously comparing

their belief in their own deficiency with the evidence available to them—
and by challenging themselves to consider the positive evidence—they can
realize the falsity of their belief and expand their view of themselves to
include their real value. Challenge shame by focusing on all the ways in
which you are good.
Actively work to reverse your self-debasing tendency through efforts at self-love. Another

important aspect of development for the Four is learning to accept
themselves and not beat themselves up for what they perceive as their
deficiencies. It is crucial for Fours to gradually learn to find the love and
acceptance they crave within themselves, to learn to appreciate who they
really are, and let go of their consistent focus on the ways in which they are
unworthy or bad. A big part of the chronic frustration Fours feel in not
getting the love they want is that they don’t love themselves. This lack of
self-love is what keeps the whole Four defensive cycle going. Make active
efforts to notice and embrace all the positive things about yourself. Catch
yourself in the act of being harsh to yourself and work to stop it.
Fours tend to
compare themselves to others and find themselves lacking. Then, depending
on their subtype, they can either strive in masochistic ways to prove
themselves, wallow in feelings of inadequacy, or get aggressively
competitive. It will be important for Fours on a path to growth to see these
behaviors as the hallmarks of excessive self-judgment and self-debasement
and realize that the actual “cure” for feelings of deficiency is self-love and
self-acceptance. If you are a Four, notice when you are engaging in
behaviors based on an assumption of your inadequacy—and actively work
to appreciate yourself and care for yourself. Sometimes consciously shifting
your attention and your behaviors can help you to eventually turn around
your beliefs and emotional attitudes.
Recognize envy, competition, and masochistic behavior as danger signs.

Distracting yourself in various ways from your own growth and
expansion through your attachment to various emotions
Observe and accept your emotions instead of over-identifying with them. Consciously identify

and accept your emotions without becoming attached to or over-identified
with particular emotions (or emotions in general). Some Fours, who may

have been shamed for having feelings early on, may also need to
consistently remind themselves that their feelings are valid and important,
regardless of how others may have reacted to them in the past. Consciously
notice when you get stuck in specific emotions, especially hopelessness,
sadness, or regret. Recognize how this might be a way of avoiding moving
through and mourning real losses and getting to the other side. Allow
yourself to have your feelings, move through them, listen to the information
they bring, and then let them go. Most importantly, recognize how the act of
getting lost in your feelings operates to protect you from taking action or
reaching out in productive ways to actually get what you need—make the
choice to let go of your emotions after you’ve felt them sufficiently.
Consciously shifting your attention from your feelings to thinking or taking
action will help you avoid fixating on your emotions in unproductive ways,
valid though the emotions themselves might be.
Notice and work against your desire to create drama and intensity. If you are a Four, notice

when you are amping things up to avoid specific experiences—like
boredom or emptiness—and challenge yourself to take the risk of accepting
and valuing the “here and now,” even if it feels ordinary and uninteresting
initially. If you are intensifying your emotions to distract yourself from
being with feelings and realities you may not want to accept, allow yourself
to be with any feelings and experiences you may be avoiding, knowing that
this is the way out of being trapped in your defensive emotional stance.
Support yourself in accepting your present experience by consciously
focusing on what is good and pleasurable in the here and now, and also by
feeling through painful feelings you have been avoiding as a way of
affirming your ability to work through them.
Learn to see hopelessness, suffering, and longing as a defense against living and opening up to
possibilities. Fours tend to find comfort in the familiar feelings of

hopelessness, disappointment, and longing—and their attachment to these
feelings can be a kind of addiction. It is vital for Fours seeking to break out
of their characterological trap to see that these feelings hold them back from
finding ways to get the love and appreciation they crave. Remind yourself
that it is just as possible and easy to focus on hope as it is to focus on
hopelessness, or to focus on what makes you happy as opposed to what
causes you to suffer. Then shift your attention to all the possibilities for love

and connection that would be available to you if you could let go of your
focus on specific feelings and see what positive options are available to you
in the present.

Focusing on what’s missing such that nothing measures up and can
be taken in
Align your desires with what’s possible. Naranjo points out that envy is an “excessive

desiring.” Fours’ desiring is excessive because it grows out of an early and
painful experience of frustration and because it “asks for more than can be
expected.”20 Waiting for what’s perfect or having unrealistic expectations of
others can be ways of defending against opening up to getting the love you
want. Without settling for less than what is truly satisfying, try to notice
when you are asking for more than you can get as a way of defending
against disappointment, and experiment with moderating your expectations
and requests. Notice when you avoid accepting something good because
you’re busy finding fault with it, and challenge yourself to see all the things
that could be satisfying and “good enough.”
Apply your idealism to seeing the worth inherent in yourself and others. Instead of imagining
that what you really need is only available through the attainment of some
distant ideal, support yourself by being aware of and appreciating the worth
inherent in yourself and others. Actively remind yourself that the worth
something has for you can be based on how you perceive its positive
aspects. If you focus on and idealize what’s missing, you will be perpetually
unsatisfied. But if you see what’s ideal in everything, even the everyday,
you can identify and receive the gifts in even mundane experiences.
Actively shift your attention to see the positive. Make it a constant practice to see the

positive in everything—in yourself, in others, and in life. When you catch
yourself focusing on lack as a way of justifying your frustration, allow
yourself to make a list of all the good things that are happening, and support
yourself in embracing and moving toward those things. To receive the love
and understanding you want, you have to have the courage to shift your
attention to how that might be possible rather than dwelling on
impossibility.

The Inner Flow for Type Four: Using the Arrow Lines to Chart
Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
defines one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “stress–
growth” point, and its “child–heart” point map one kind of growth path
described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can be seen to
suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “stress–growth” point ahead
represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally fall back
into as a comfort in times of stress, and now must reintegrate
consciously.

Type Four Moving Forward to Type Two: Consciously Using the
Two “Stress–Growth” Point for Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Fours brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Two: allowing for a balance between
self-referencing and other-referencing, between meeting your own needs
and meeting the needs of others, and between being your authentic self and
adapting to other people. Under stress, Fours can get defensive when
pressed toward the Two point and act out the lower side of Two by giving
compulsively in an effort to be liked, or giving up what they need in an
attempt to buy others’ love or acceptance. But when Fours can consciously
manage the challenges embodied in the Two “stress–growth” opportunity,
they can use the high side Two qualities to bring themselves out of their
self-absorption, intense feelings, and isolation, find creative ways to express
who they really, are and open themselves up to connecting with others.
The Four working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools that healthy Type Twos use: a sensitivity to the needs and preferences
of others, a positive view of what’s possible in relationship, and the
conscious management of feelings and needs in light of the feelings and
needs of others. The Two stance of adapting to please others can help Fours
learn to be more adaptable and supportive of others in a way that also
enlarges their view of their own worth and value to others. Fours can get
lost in their own interior emotional worlds, but they can temper this
tendency in service of their growth by reaching out more to nurture others.
Finding ways to provide support and understanding to other people can be a
good way for Fours to balance out their over-focus on their inner experience

of lack or on a particular mood or emotional reaction. Consciously
embodying an attitude of service to others can highlight Fours’ qualities of
optimism, generosity, and cheerfulness—attributes that they might not
always see and value in themselves. Through consciously balancing selfreferencing with other-referencing, and the ability to dwell in darker
feelings with the ability to be light, Fours can use the Two Point as a way to
embody a more full and more whole sense of who they really are, and work
against the self-deprecating tendency of their “acorn” self.

Type Four Moving Back to Type One: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Fours calls for them to reclaim their ability to
use self-evaluation, self-discipline, and structure as ways to support
themselves rather than as ways of devaluing and punishing themselves. As
children, Fours may have had to downplay their natural ability to use their
ideals and follow the rules as a way of taking action to feel good about
themselves and be productive in the world. In response to early loss or
deprivation, Fours more typically took refuge in a flawed self-image and an
experience of longing for what might have been, which can pull their focus
away from working hard to prove their worth. The strategy of trying to be
good as a way of earning approval may not have worked if they had to cope
with an overwhelming sense of loss or deep feelings of deficiency.
Fours tend to cope by attaching to a feeling of hopelessness or
melancholy, to avoid being hopeful about things they believe might not
happen. In doing this, they may have had to give up One attributes such as
the active capacity to enact practical ideals and a belief in their ability to
control what happens through hard work. They may not have been able to
provide structure for themselves through routine and adherence to standards
and rules because they had to focus on coping with a specific experience of
loss or deprivation.
Fours can consciously draw on the strengths of the One Point, using them
to gain the support they need in their growth toward the Two Point, by
taking action to manifest their ideals. Being more perfectionistic—not by
controlling or stifling emotions, but by actively improving themselves or
their environment—can give Fours a sense of control and accomplishment.
One Four I know, for example, likes to work in the garden to relax when he

has time off. His rows of vegetables are perfect, and his garden is extremely
beautiful. Working in his garden provides him with a structured activity that
relaxes him, contains him, and lets him express his natural creativity.
Regular patterns and repetitive work can help a Four find peace and
containment amidst a life in which they can get lost in the ups and downs of
their shifting moods. By reincorporating their ability to work hard in
support of improving themselves or others, Fours can take action and feel
more powerful and confident, which can support their growth and
development instead of holding them back in a search for something they
lost in the past.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Envy and Aiming for Equanimity
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
Four, the Vice (or passion) of the type is envy and its opposite, the Virtue, is
equanimity. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to Virtue
conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion functions
and consciously work toward the embodiment of our higher Virtue, the
more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and fixated
patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side or “oak tree-Self.”
As Fours become more familiar with their experience of envy and
develop their ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work
further by focusing on enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to the passion of
envy. In the case of Type Four, the Virtue of equanimity represents a state of
being that Fours can attain by consciously manifesting their higher
capacities.
Equanimity is a way of being that is both engaged with emotional life
and above the ups and downs and pushes and pulls of being overly
consumed with specific emotional experiences. When Fours are in a place
of equanimity, they can feel their feelings but not be consumed by their
suffering. They can let go of particular feelings without abandoning
themselves. They can focus on important emotions without losing
themselves. Equanimity is a way of viewing emotions from a healthy
distance, with the wisdom and detachment of the inner observer that is part
of the higher Self. Sandra Maitri describes equanimity as the ability to see

the big picture of things such that “everything falls into perspective.”21
Explaining that “equanimity” literally means “equal mind,” she describes it
as a state of “emotional balance” that’s characterized by a balanced view of
ourselves and others, and which is developed as we “learn to keep our heart
open through the changing circumstances of our life and practice.”22
If envy is a state of emotional reactivity based on a perception that others
have something you need and lack, equanimity is a place of openness and
acceptance based on a larger view of the whole of ourselves, other people,
and life. Embodying equanimity as a Four means you have learned to rise
above your intense and shifting emotions, which are based in an experience
of suffering brought on by the personality’s experience of loss and
deprivation. Embodying equanimity means you value your feelings for the
way they reflect your emotional truth, but you also have the confidence and
understanding to not get swept up in them or allow them to distort your
view of who you are and what you are capable of. Equanimity is thus the
antidote to the endless craving of envy because it focuses attention on the
big picture, on the value of all emotions, and the importance of detaching
from particular emotions or a sense of lack, allowing you to open up to an
experience of abundance.
When Fours do the “Vice to Virtue” work of noticing how the painful
emotions that envy inspires trap them in a vicious circle, the wider view of
equanimity can wake them up to their own essential goodness, allowing
them to see all emotions as equally valuable and leading them to an
enlivening understanding of their fundamental wholeness.

Specific Work for the Three Type Four Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
Whatever type you are, the path from observing your passion to finding its
antidote is not exactly the same for each of the subtypes. The path of
conscious self-work has been characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and
grace:”23 the grit of our personality programming, the grind of our efforts to
grow, and the grace that comes to us from doing our work in conscious and
positive ways. Each subtype has to grind, or exert effort, against something
slightly different. This insight is one of the great benefits of understanding
the three distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.

Self-Preservation Fours can travel the path from envy to equanimity by relaxing

into their feelings more and sharing them with others, thereby allowing
themselves more sources of internal and external support. Envy leads SelfPreservation Fours to believe they have to go it on their own, but by
actively seeking out help from others, they can allow themselves to have
more room to breathe and relax. By consciously seeking to embody
equanimity, these Fours can develop a place of peace inside themselves—
allowing them to feel through and let go of their pain, allowing them to live
more from their fragility, and healing what needs to be healed. SelfPreservation Fours actively release envy by not working so hard to prove
themselves and instead allowing for more lightness, fun, and pleasure.
Rising above the need to suffer silently and tough everything out means
going easier on yourself and allowing yourself to embrace all of who you
are, not just your ability to endure.
Social Fours can travel the path from envy to equanimity by doing the work it

takes to release their inferiority complex, own their positive qualities, and
enhance their self-confidence. If you are a Social Four, it will help you to
work on relaxing your self-judgments and negative self-perceptions—to
take the risk to see what is positive about you and your life and not get
stuck in envious comparisons and shame. Manifesting a sense of
equanimity means valuing all your feelings equally, and also not getting
over-identified with your feelings. It helps to consider that it’s okay to be
angry and express wishes and feelings directly, from a place of selfcompassion, instead of seducing through suffering. Most of all, you can
support yourself in embodying equanimity by considering all your feelings,
consciously analyzing the whole situation, and taking action to get what
you need and want instead of becoming so invested in your emotional
suffering.
Sexual Fours can travel the path from envy to equanimity by strengthening

their ability to be with their own suffering without needing to externalize it
or project it onto others. If you are a Sexual Four, you can grow by seeing
all your emotions as equally valuable and important, whether you are
feeling envious and angry or sad and vulnerable. Your tender feelings are as
important to consider as your competitive impulses. For you, equanimity
means recognizing the value of who you are, even if you aren’t the best or

superior to anyone else. No one has to prove themselves to be the best to be
worthy—we are all inherently good enough. Allow yourself to see your
anger, frustration, and impatience as important clues to deeper feelings of
pain that you might be experiencing or relegating to unconsciousness. By
allowing yourself to experience all your feelings and remembering they are
all important reflections of the emotional truth of who you are, you can
develop more compassion for yourself and others and allow yourself to be
more open to receiving love and acceptance from the people around you.

Conclusion
THE ARCHETYPE OF THE FOUR POINT represents the way we all fear
abandonment when we feel imperfect and focus on our flaws as a way to
control or defend against loss in a world that seems to require us to be
special to be loved. The Four path of growth shows us how to transform our
longing and suffering into a sense of confidence in our inherent lovability
so that we can wake up to a fuller experience of who we are and what we
can be. In each of the Type Four subtypes, we see a specific character who
teaches us how equanimity can allow us to value our emotional truth and
essential wholeness, thereby furthering our own evolution through the
alchemy of self-observation, self-knowledge, self-development, and selfacceptance.

CHAPTER 9

The Point Three Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
The only lies for which we are truly punished are those we tell
ourselves.
—V. S. Naipaul

TYPE THREE REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who seeks to create
an image of value and success, and to gain the admiration of others, through
active efforts in both work and appearance. This drive provides defensive
protection in a world that rewards achievement and attractiveness and
emphasizes what things look like on the outside.
This archetype also exists as Jung’s concept of the “persona,” the
individual’s “system of adaptation to, or the manner in which he assumes in
dealing with, the world.”1 Taken from the term used to describe the mask
worn by an actor, the persona is our conscious outer social face, the role we
play or the image we show to others “to give form to our outward sense of
self.”2 The persona takes its form and function from external, collective
reality.
Type Threes are the prototype for the way in which we all adopt a
personality as an external public face in order to survive in the world and
mediate between the inner self and the social environment. It is the model
for the desire we all have to “put on a good face” or wear a social mask as a
means of both protection and a marketing effort. This archetypal stance
prioritizes looking good and matching social ideals of value and status as a
way of feeling accepted and earning approval.
This effort also necessarily involves inhibiting or covering over aspects
of the “real self” that don’t fit with the constructed social mask. Type
Threes tend to lose contact with the deeper emotions they naturally have
that might interfere with the design of the image they create for others, and

thus may become overidentified with their persona and under-identified
with who they really are.
We also find the Three archetype in American culture in the emphasis on
the values of “the market:” the importance of packaging, advertising, and
selling products; the central focus on “winning” in a competitive
environment by attracting the most customers; and the driving force of
profit maximization through prioritizing work and corporate interests. The
“American Dream” as a “rags to riches” story of upward mobility through
hard work, demonstrated by the acquisition of conventionally agreed-upon
symbols of success (a house, a nice car, a vacation home), also reflects the
core themes of this archetype. In the US mass media, the superficial
attractiveness of things is emphasized, and depth is often sacrificed.
The Three archetype can thus be seen at the societal level in all cultures
in which competition and winning are emphasized, and in mercantilism
generally, where marketing and sales efforts are a central component of
social interaction. The archetypal themes associated with the Three Point
can especially be seen in the corporate world, where the focus is on
competing and working hard in pursuit of success in the form of popularity,
profits, and coming out on top.3
Type Three individuals work very hard and know how to make a good
impression. They are extremely competent and effective doers who get a lot
done and make it look easy (even though it requires much effort). Threes
are skilled at using goals to motivate their efforts and are resourceful and
productive in achieving those goals. They know how to present themselves
to others and fit the image of whatever context they might be in. Their
specific “superpower” is their ability to make things happen by finding the
most direct path to their goal, removing obstacles that might get in the way
—and looking good the whole time. They know how to assure their own
success by working diligently, completing the tasks necessary to reaching
their goal, and exuding an image of success and competence.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Threes’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel:” they exhaust
themselves by working too hard, and they lose sight of who they really are
apart from the persona they’ve adopted to achieve their goals. And they can
be hard-hearted and insensitive to others in their race to the finish line.
However, when they can learn to balance their focus on work and
achievement with a focus on the needs and feelings of their true self, they

can blend their skill at actualizing goals with the creativity and depth of
who they are, producing positive results that can enhance life for
themselves and others.
The Type Three Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey:
Sailing by Skylla and Charybdis and Landing at Thrinakia
The goddess Circe tells Odysseus that after he and his crew pass
by the Sirens, they will sail through a narrow passage. Circe
advises Odysseus to travel through this perilous strait as quickly
and efficiently as possible, because she knows that he will have to
sacrifice six of his men to Skylla’s six heads as he passes through.
Odysseus faces many leadership challenges as he strives to return
with his crew to Ithaca. In this pivotal section of the journey, we
see both his single-minded focus on achieving his goal and the
disastrous consequences of seizing power illegitimately.
Odysseus knows that he must steer his ship carefully between
these two terrible obstacles: Skylla (a savage six-headed monster)
and Charybdis (a deadly, inescapable whirlpool). He cannot avoid
these obstacles, so he focuses on keeping his ship on course to
achieve the dire but practical goal of getting through the
dangerous straight between them. He decides not to tell his crew
about Skylla, because he knows he must sacrifice at least six of
his men to keep on course and avoid complete destruction in the
whirlpool.
Odysseus is the right man for the job. He knows he must keep his
ego in check and stay efficiently, consistently, and relentlessly on
course toward his goal. He masterfully exercises his power to
control information and make the key decisions. His crew does
not hesitate to follow his orders at the crucial moments. Six
crewmen die. Everyone else survives.
When they reach the island of Thrinakia, Odysseus gives his crew
a very specific warning. He orders his men not to touch the prime
cattle grazing there; they are the property of the sun god, Helios,
“who sees and hears all things.”4

The men comply until their food supplies run out. Then, as
Odysseus sleeps, his second-in-command (Eurylochus) convinces
the men that being killed by the gods at sea is better than starving
to death. They feast on Helios’s cattle, assuming for themselves
the powers and privileges that belong only to the sun god.
Odysseus awakens, but it is too late. He orders them to sea as
soon as the wind permits. Zeus himself promptly destroys the
boat and crew, leaving Odysseus as the sole survivor.
These encounters symbolize the power and pitfalls of the Type
Three personality. Odysseus’s focused, authentic leadership saved
as many men as possible under harrowing circumstances. In his
absence, the men assumed power beyond their true nature and led
themselves to their doom.

The Type Three Personality Structure
AS PART OF THE “HEART-BASED” or “emotion-based” triad of types, the
personality structure of the Three is centered in the emotion of sadness or grief.
Threes have a focus on creating a specific image of themselves. Each of the
heart type personalities (Two, Three, and Four) relate to other people
primarily through emotional empathy. The “feeling sense” these types share
gives these individuals a heightened need to connect with others and an
ability to read interpersonal situations well on the emotional-relational
level. Relationships are in the foreground of their attention, and so the heart
types are especially aware of the image they feel they need to present to
attract the love or approval of others.
While Type Fours overdo an attachment to grief and Type Twos are in
conflict with their sadness, Threes underdo grief, habitually numbing out
their feelings so they don’t get in the way of working to reach their goals.

The sadness at the core of the heart type personalities reflects their
feeling of not being loved for who they really are and their grief over
having lost touch with their real selves because they’ve disowned who they
really are and created a specific image to get the love (or approval) they
need. All three of the heart types have core issues related to unmet needs to
be seen, accepted, and loved for who they are. Their respective coping
strategies are designed to gain approval from other people in three distinct
ways as a substitute for the love they seek but fear they can’t get as they
are. While Twos strive to have a likable, pleasing image, and Fours present
themselves as unique and special, Threes create an image of achievement
and success.
Accomplishing things and looking good feels like the route to survival
and well-being to Threes, who use their “heart intelligence” to
automatically size up what others see as admirable and then become that.
Performing well at tasks, reaching goals, and constructing a polished image
—adhering to what is considered successful according to generally accepted
standards—allows them to prove their worth to others.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Three
Threes report that they received the message early on that they were loved
for what they did. Whether implicit or explicit, perhaps due to wellintentioned parental praise for specific accomplishments, as children,
Threes came to believe that the path to gaining support, approval, and
admiration from others was performing and succeeding at tasks. Threes
develop a sense that they are not loved for who they really are as
individuals but for what they do. This leads them to adopt a coping strategy

of conforming to parental expectations and conventional ideals of
achievement. Thus, their need for admiration grows out of an early
experience of being praised for achievements rather than affirmed for
aspects of their “real self.”
Alternatively, Three children may not have gotten the attention they
needed, so they feel motivated to attract attention—to stand out and get
noticed—by doing things to impress others. They become successful
through the effort they expend in an attempt to avoid being ignored. Some
Threes, for example, lacked parental support or protection as children, and
they learned to be doers in order to survive. When a child loses a father in
particular, he or she may feel a need to become supercompetent in order to
fill the gap left by the absence of the archetypally masculine (active,
protective, and productive) parental presence.
Faced with the perception that they must prove themselves to be
admirable in some way in order to earn love, Threes develop a survival
strategy in which they identify with and then become what others value.
Type Three individuals possess a sensitive radar, or antenna, for what others
like, admire, and view as successful. They turn themselves into a person
who does or has whatever others associate with success and achievement.
Similar to the Type Two’s strategy of determining what others need and like
and then shape-shifting into that, Threes shape-shift to match an image of
competence, attractiveness, and high status. Thus, Threes are not only
oriented toward attaining goals and looking good, they are also highly
competitive and focused on winning.
Motivated by a need to feel affirmed in the face of an early lack of
attention or a perception that approval is linked with performance, the
Three coping strategy provides both a focus on performance and a defense
against painful feelings. “Doing” thus takes precedence over “being” and
feeling for the Three. Doing seems to bring the desired response of approval
from others, while “being” becomes a blind spot, as feelings are avoided so
as to not create any emotional obstacles to doing. This (understandably)
leads Threes to be “human doings” instead of “human beings.”5
Threes therefore cope with a world that doesn’t offer them unconditional
love by identifying with their image and their work, seeing themselves as
equal to the image they create, and believing they are what they do. As their
image and their work represent things they can control, Threes strive to
match an image of what others admire; they work hard to earn approval by

achieving a socially sanctioned definition of success and avoiding failure at
all costs.
Candice, a Self-Preservation Three, describes her childhood
situation and the development of her coping strategy:
My mother used to tell me I was such a good baby that she could
leave me alone in my playpen for hours while she chased my
older brother. Even as a child, I was proud of that. It was only
when I saw how appalled others were at my mother’s behavior
that I realized my “pride” in self-sufficiency was misguided. I
vacillated between being fearful about being ignored and feeling
safe in my ability to fly under the radar of my mother’s intrusive
codependence. My brother was diagnosed as schizophrenic when
we were in our early twenties and he committed suicide at twentynine. I’ve often felt that I hid behind him—being ignored and able
to do for myself saved me. In those days, psychiatrists literally
blamed mothers. My mom, who was a lot better than many,
carried enormous guilt. My becoming industrious and reliable
allowed her not to “worry” about me. This capacity has always
trumped birth order in our family. When something goes wrong,
my phone is the first to ring despite being the third of four
children. I’m just back from helping my ninety-five-year-old
father get settled at home after surgery. My younger brother and
older sister had both been there before me. A friend of my father’s
said to me, “When you come to town, things get done.”
As a Self-Preservation Three, I have an instinctual sense of what
needs to be done and how to do it efficiently. It was hard to
acknowledge that I’ve trained those around me to expect me to
take over, so in more recent years it has been an interesting
experience to step back. Before I jump in, I now ask the following
questions: Does this have to done at all? Does it have to be done
right now? Does it have to be done by me? It’s been amazing to
see how much wasn’t needed but served my “doingitis.”
“I’m fine” was my mantra for years. I always bristled at the
descriptions of Threes as wanting to look good. When I read that
Self-Preservation Threes want to look like they have it together

but don’t want to own their image-consciousness—that they have
“vanity for having no vanity”—I knew I’d found my home. I
wasn’t happy about it, but I knew it was true. A recent broken
ankle gave me an opportunity to observe myself and my reactions
to offers of assistance. I can feel the “I’m fine” rising physically
and have to consciously counteract it.
Another challenge I’ve faced is recognizing and feeling my
emotions. I’ve often joked that “emotions are not aerodynamic
and Threes don’t like to be slowed down.” One great find was The
Book of Qualities by J. Ruth Gendler. She describes dozens of
emotions as if they are people. It helped me access a realm that I
had avoided (originally) to help my mother not worry about me. It
opened the gateway to truly feeling the loss of my brother, which
carved a path for other emotions to pass through me. I am now
fine not being fine.

The Main Type Three Defense Mechanism: Identification
The defense mechanism associated with this early coping strategy is
identification. By identifying with—by locating and matching a specific image
or model—and becoming what others value, Threes attempt to satisfy their
need for approval, which substitutes for their underlying need to be seen
and loved. Threes create such a compelling image to defend against the pain
of not being seen and loved as they are that they begin to mistake their
image for the totality of who they are. They overidentify with the image
they create as a way to control how people respond to them, and in the
process they may forget that they are not equal to their image. This is why
they represent the prototype of something we all do: identify with our
personality such that we don’t realize that we are more than our persona.
But how exactly does “identification” operate as a defense mechanism? It
may seem strange that identification is even considered a psychological
defense, as identifying with someone or modeling oneself after someone
can seem like a normal, benign activity. And while it’s true that some kinds
of identification have few, if any, defensive components, many instances of
identification are motivated by a need to avoid anxiety, grief, shame, or
other painful feelings. Identification can also be a way to shore up a shaky
sense of self or to generate self-esteem.6

Identification thus operates as a defense against painful feelings related
to the early sense that love was conditional by allowing an individual to
deliberately (though at least partly unconsciously) become like another
person or an ideal of a particular kind of person. By adopting the
characteristics of another person, or an image that others admire, you can
reduce the threat of difficult feelings that grow out of a fear of not being
seen and loved for who you are.
But what do Threes typically identify with, exactly? Naranjo explains
that “central to type Three is identification with an ideal self-image built as
a response to the expectation of others,”7 which often starts with the
defensive effort to match ideal characteristics their parents valued. Threes
defensively transform themselves into what important others—people in
their environment whom they want to impress—admire and appreciate. By
noticing and adopting characteristics that others regard as valuable, Threes
seek to match an external model to assure approval.

The Type Three Focus of Attention
As a result of getting the message that love and approval is tied to
performance, Threes focus their attention on achieving goals and tasks and
on creating an image of success in the eyes of others. Naturally able to
focus like a laser beam on whatever tasks and goals will help them become
what society defines as successful or valuable, most Threes achieve a high
degree of worldly success. However, what gets sacrificed in the process is
the Three’s feelings and authentic sense of self, as Threes don’t focus as
much attention on who they are apart from their image. Threes are primarily
other-focused, so they don’t attend as much to what’s going on inside them.
Threes become so focused on the things they have to do to make progress
toward a goal that they tend to be hyperaware of obstacles that might block
the path to their desired result. One Three I know described his vigilance
about the potential for such obstructions as his tendency to quickly assess
any “drag coefficients.” Threes get so keenly focused on the path toward
their goals that they automatically home in on and address any factors in the
environment that may slow down their forward movement.
For Threes, even vacation and leisure time will be structured in terms of
things to do. Frequent list-makers, Threes’ attention is often focused on
organizing their life in terms of the tasks that need to be accomplished,
results that need to be produced, and the ways they will fill their time (such

that they can avoid gaps in activity where feelings could emerge).
Accomplishing tasks leads to the satisfying experience of checking items
off the list after they are completed.
Threes often multitask; they are adept at splitting their attention over a
range of activities. Experts at completing tasks in the most rapid and
efficient way possible, Threes report that they find it both necessary and
fairly easy to do many things at once, often at a fast pace, as moving
quickly and efficiently enables them to accomplish the maximum number of
tasks possible without wasting time.
The Three’s focus of attention also goes to “playing to the crowd.”
Natural performers, Threes put their attention and thus their energy toward
winning approval through focusing on other people and how they are
responding to the Three’s presentation. Naranjo describes the Three as
having a “marketing orientation.” A good marketer determines the needs
and values of his target audience and then adapts the presentation based on
his audience’s responses. This is why Threes tend to be characterized as
“chameleons.” They have an automatic ability to match the perfect model
of how someone should look in every context and every situation. Threes’
talent for creating a persona in this way is their way of constructing an
“acorn shell” that is protective and useful, but ultimately limiting if they
can’t break out of it.

The Type Three Emotional Passion: Vanity
The passion of Type Three is vanity. Vanity is a passion for “living for the
eyes of others.”8 The passion of vanity motivates Threes to present a false
image to others to inspire their admiration and to live life “in anticipation or
fantasy of the experience of another.”9 Vanity thus moves Threes
(unconsciously) to live for an insubstantial image—imagining how they
will look to others from the outside—rather than out of their “true selves.”
Vanity is understood here as the drive “to shine, attract attention, either
through the development of sex appeal or through achievement or
success”10 based on established, universally accepted criteria. This involves
a lot of effort, and Threes are action-oriented, striving people who do things
well. They have “a talent for acting and a liking for display and applause.”11
When under the sway of vanity, which is oriented to external appearances,
Threes have “little capacity for inwardness,”12 and they have to be doing

something all the time, such that they do not “leave themselves time for
being with themselves.”13
In the early Christian Contemplative tradition, where we see the earliest
descriptions of the same passions we find in the Enneagram, vanity is called
“Vainglory” and is described as involving “fantasizing about social
encounters, a pretence of industriousness, the contrary of the truth…desire
for privilege, the ultimate title, [and] slavery to praises.”14
The Three’s vanity expresses a deep need to be seen positively—a need
the personality seeks to satisfy through the cultivation of a particular image
designed to appeal to others by drawing on conventional values of
attractiveness, quality, and stature. Living for and through appearances
leads Threes to a constant preoccupation with how they look from the point
of view of other people. They become good at playing a role or acting a
part, marketing themselves through good packaging, and selling themselves
as the kind of person people respect and admire.

The Type Three Cognitive Mistake:
“When You Look This Good, Who Needs Feelings?” or “I Am
What I Do”
We all get stuck in habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs,
feelings, and actions, and this continues even after the mental models that
create our overall perspective aren’t accurate anymore.15 While the passion
shapes the personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive fixation”
preoccupies the personality’s thought processes.

Deceit is the mental fixation of Type Three. This means that the key
principle that forms the Three’s thinking is the “self-falsification” entailed

in creating an image for public consumption. As part of the normal
functioning of their personality, Threes “lie” to the world about who they
are, but most of the time they don’t do this intentionally. Instead, Threes’
thought processes, like their core emotional motivations, are driven by the
deep need to impress people.
Thus, much of the time, when Threes craft a specific image to show to
the outside world, they are engaging in self-deceit. They automatically and
unconsciously present a false front to influence the way people respond to
them, and they often believe that their false image is who they really are.
They may not always consciously see that there is a difference between the
image they manipulate in order to impress and who they are inside. The
lack of truthfulness of the Three may not be what we typically think of as
“deceit” in that the deception happens at a deeper level: Threes lie to
themselves about who they really are because they so badly need to believe
they are whoever they need to be for others to see them in a positive light.
The core beliefs, assumptions, and thoughts associated with this Three
mental stance (or “trance”) of deceit, or self-falsification, include ideas and
rationalizations that support the central Three personality strategy of getting
things done—being productive and effective—in the service of maintaining
an image. The Three’s mental organizing principles, or the key beliefs that
guide their habitual patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving include:

People admire and respect success and achievement. To inspire
admiration in others you must be successful and achieve.
If you achieve high status, you are a valuable person in the
eyes of society.
Working hard to achieve specific goals enables me to control
the things I do and makes me successful.
Getting things done and being productive supports my wellbeing.
Setting goals is an important way to stay organized, get things
done, and achieve success.

Reaching specific goals depends upon hard work. I work hard
to do whatever it takes to reach my goals and remove any
obstacles in the way.
Image and appearance matter.
How you look and what you’ve done tells people what to think
and feel about you.
It is important to have the right image for every context so that
people will think well of you.
Feelings aren’t as important as getting things done. Feelings
get in the way of getting things done and so can be a waste of
time.
These common Three beliefs and recurring thoughts support and
perpetuate the creation of a socially adept self-presentation designed to
inspire people’s positive regard. When Threes adhere more strongly to this
mental stance—when they are “in the trance” of their type—it may be much
harder to stop identifying with the personality and “come home” to the
feelings and thoughts of the true self.

The Type Three Trap:
“I Have Such a Great Image, Even I Like it More than Me”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Three
leads the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the
limitations of the personality cannot resolve.
When you create an image to get love, what gets “loved” is the image,
not necessarily the person behind the image, which intensifies the Three’s
conviction that they can’t be loved as they are (and necessitates the
construction of an image to get the love).
Threes identify with an image of value in order to be seen positively in
the eyes of others, but then they aren’t “at home” in themselves to receive
the love or appreciation they elicit. Threes disconnect from their feelings to
do all the work they do to earn others’ approval, and so they aren’t rooted in
their own experience and can’t be present to relate to the people they have
won over through all their efforts. By needing to work so hard and look so

good, Threes turn themselves into something they aren’t and lose sight of
who they really are. They become what they think they need to be to forge
positive connections with others; but because they live through an image of
what they have become in order to be valued—and not their real selves—
they often aren’t available for real love and connection.

The Key Type Three Traits
Other-Directedness

It can seem to others that Threes must be fundamentally self-oriented
because they get so much done to further their own interests, know how to
present themselves to attract people, set goals and reach them, and seem
easily able to manifest their personal desires.
At a basic level, however, the Three personality is shaped around playing
to an audience. The strategy of creating an image for public consumption is
based on the need to attract the attention of others and rests on Threes’
ability to accurately read their audience and then reflect or become what
others value. Thus, like any smart marketing expert, they do things and
create an appearance designed to impress others, based on a careful
evaluation of what others admire.
Achievement Orientation

Type Threes have an achievement orientation, meaning they are high
achievers that work hard to set and reach goals based on social or cultural
conceptions of what makes a person successful. A focus on achievement
also means that Threes value efficiency and move at a fast pace to get as
much done as possible without wasting time. For Threes, the drive to
achieve can be so intense that they can become workaholics, unable to slow
down or stop or take a vacation from all the “doing” they do.
Threes’ formula for achievement really works. Unlike other personality
types who may have habitual patterns that inhibit their functioning in the
external world, the coping strategy at the heart of Threes’ personality
structure is more aligned with what Western culture sees as a productive
(and thus a good) way to operate. Their goal and task orientation, their
willingness to work very hard for long periods of time, their strong sense of
ambition, and their optimism regarding their ability to achieve whatever

they aspire to mean that Threes are usually successful at accomplishing
their goals.
Focus on Success

Type Threes have a natural understanding of what constitutes success in a
given culture or context, especially the outward signs of success. They hold
the general view that if you know what it takes to be a success, why not just
do it and enjoy the fruits of material achievements and the admiration of
others that tend to go with it? A keen eye for what constitutes “success” and
the willingness and drive to do what they need to do to achieve it makes
Threes people who often embody whatever their cultural context views as
successful.
In seeking to ensure that they are successful, Threes determine the
shortest path between points A and B (the goal), and they do whatever it
takes to get there in the most efficient way possible. To do otherwise just
doesn’t make sense to the Three. Why would you tolerate failure or halfway
measures when you could work to accomplish your goals and achieve
success? Why would you fail to do something you have established as a
goal when you could just find a way to do it? The Nike slogan “Just Do It”
effectively captures this common Three outlook.
Competitiveness and the Drive to Win

As a part of the drive to achieve, Threes can be ruthless and competitive,
wanting to win at any cost and dominating situations in which they believe
they must exercise their power to get things done. Pragmatic and practical,
Threes specialize in targeting specific achievements and doing what it takes
to make them happen. This means they play to win, they are extremely
competitive, and they put a lot of energy and effort into coming out on top.
In fact, Threes often report that they want to win so much that they simply
don’t engage in activities they know they can’t win.
Image Manipulation and Self-Deception

Threes are so good at manipulating their image to ensure success on the
public stage and the admiration of their audience that it can be very hard for
Threes to see more deeply into themselves, beyond their image and
achievements. Threes automatically tap into what others find appealing and
create a perfect persona to match that picture. Whether at work, in the gym,
or going out at night, Threes excel at wearing the right clothes and creating

the perfect image for every setting. They acknowledge the importance of
appearances and put thought and energy into understanding what others
might want or expect.
In doing this, however, Threes not only (unconsciously) deceive others
about who they really are, they also deceive themselves. Their intense focus
on maintaining the right image (and disowning their feelings to support this
false presentation) creates confusion about where the image stops and they
begin. When Threes are “in the trance” of their personality’s fixation, they
mix up the reality of who they are—their feelings, needs, desires, and
preferences—with the appearances they create to impact others. The deceit
associated with this personality concerns the creation of a false pretense in
place of a true self that might fail or be judged as flawed or inadequate.
An attractive and successful businesswoman friend of mine once said to
me, in all seriousness, “I am what I do.” Knowing the Enneagram and
believing that she was a Three, I decided to argue with her. I said, “No, you
aren’t,” (thinking to myself that she was much more than what she does).
She said, “Yes, I am.” I said, “No, you aren’t.” And she said, “Yes, I am.”
After we went back and forth like this a few more times, I decided to stop
arguing with her. But I noticed I felt sad afterward. I knew she had good
reason for thinking she “is what she does”—or for wanting to believe it.
She had a good, high-level job, made a lot of money, and was seen as being
very good at her chosen career. I could understand why she would want to
see herself as equal to her success at work. But as objectively great as her
career was, I knew she was much more than that.

The Type Three Shadow
Type Threes’ natural strengths align with Western ideals of what it means to
be successful, so it can seem to others like the Three has no internal
challenges. But the biggest challenge for a Three is recognizing the
difference between their authentic self and their image or role or job,
because Threes have a blind spot where their “true self” should be. Threes
tend to believe so much in their image that they consider their image and
their real self to be one and the same thing.
As long as Threes take their image to be their real self, they can’t really
act in a personal way—can’t act from their real feelings and needs. To live
from the authenticity of your real self, you need to own your own feelings
and realize that you are not the same as your public image.

Another Shadow element for Threes is how they feel emotionally. Threes
regularly avoid experiencing their real feelings because they habitually
suspend their emotions to get the job done. Because Threes rely on a coping
strategy that involves avoiding emotions, they come to fear what will
happen if they make space for feelings to emerge. Especially if Threes are
busy and successful, they may see no need to feel their emotions, so the
whole of their authentic emotional response to things can be in their
Shadow. This is often reinforced by rationalizations that it takes “too much
time” or “isn’t productive” to have feelings.
Doing is often so much in the foreground of the experience of Type
Three people that their own sense of “being” is an element of their Shadow.
It can be extremely challenging for Threes to slow down and just allow for
being—in fact, in can be difficult for them to even imagine “just being,”
because they get accustomed to doing and working all the time. It can feel
strange, uncomfortable, or anxiety-producing to not do and just sit there.
Some Threes become so oriented toward the constant “go, go, go” of
producing and doing that they can’t fathom what it means to just “be.”
It can seem to others that Threes are “not at home” in themselves, that
they are hard to connect with because they often aren’t connected to their
own being and their own inner world of feelings. Threes put so much
attention and energy on shaping themselves according to what others see as
positive and valuable, they end up experiencing a void in terms of their own
sense of self. So much of their conscious effort is directed toward detecting
what others see as successful and then matching that image (derived from
others) that their real self remains a blind spot.
Related to this, Threes also have a blind spot with regard to their
vulnerability. They focus so intently on competing to win that failure can
feel intolerable to them. They put so much attention on how to succeed and
avoid setbacks that they don’t leave room for the conscious experience of
insecurity, loss, or failure. And since Threes usually don’t have much
experience with failure, it can be devastating for them.
The Shadow of Type Three Passion and Fixation:
Vanity and Deceit in Dante’s Underworld
The Passion of Type Three is Vanity. Vanity is a passion for
“living for the eyes of others” by attracting and cultivating their

attention and approval. Vanity feeds a fantasy of how one appears
in other people’s eyes. Vanity and the mental “fixation” of deceit
are intimately related. The darker side of the Type Three
personality’s passion of vanity fuels a need to develop and present
a false image to others to inspire admiration through deception.
Deep in the Inferno, in the “fraud” section—the last circle of the
underworld before the final pit—Dante encounters the falsifiers.
The sinners here built themselves up by deceiving others:
alchemists, impersonators, counterfeiters, and strategic liars.
Unlike anywhere else in the Inferno, the falsifiers’ punishments
come from internal torments rather than external ones. And in
keeping with Dante’s poetic device of making the “sinner”
display the key problem of the specific unconscious issue he
seeks to illustrate, the punishment associated with falsifying
oneself makes the sinner externally repulsive. The alchemists all
have leprosy, and the impersonators are rabid. The counterfeiters
have dropsy, swelling them up with so much fluid that they
cannot move. The infamous liars reek from a constant burning
fever. The dark sides of vanity and deceit reach their extreme
here, as Dante symbolically communicates the negative
consequences of fraudulently presenting yourself as something
you’re not. Neglecting the truth and virtue of one’s true self in
favor of a deceptive outward appearance is revealed as an obvious
internal rot. In this way, Dante dramatically cautions us about the
shadow side of not being true to who we are.

The Three Kinds of Threes:
The Type Three Subtypes
THE PASSION OF TYPE THREE IS VANITY. The three distinct Type Three
subtypes each express vanity through the need to achieve and maintain a
successful image, but this manifests in three different ways. The SelfPreservation Three is an efficient, autonomous workaholic in the service of
security who goes against vanity by trying to be good. The Social Three
expresses vanity by wanting to be recognized on the social stage by
creating, leveraging, and selling a polished image. And the Sexual Three is

a charismatic pleaser who expresses vanity by being appealing to and
supporting others and achieving through them.
The three Type Three subtypes represent very distinct types: the SelfPreservation Three is more focused on working hard to do things in the best
way possible and less focused on being the center of attention; the Social
Three likes to be on stage more than the other Threes and craves
recognition for performance; and the Sexual Three seeks attention through
attracting a romantic partner and promoting and supporting the important
people in their lives rather than just manifesting their own achievements.

The Self-Preservation Three: “Security” (Countertype)
Following Ichazo, Naranjo calls this subtype “Security” because these
Threes work hard to achieve a sense of security, both in terms of material
and financial resources and knowing how to do things effectively. SelfPreservation Threes express a concern with security in that they have a need
to feel autonomous and self-sufficient—to know how to take care of
themselves and others.
People with this subtype often had a childhood in which they didn’t have
enough protection and resources. In response to those conditions, these
Threes learned to be active and efficient doers, oriented to taking care of
themselves without help from others. They have developed a special focus
on autonomy in the face of a jeopardized sense of security.
This preoccupation with security can also extend out to others. This
person emanates a sense of security; they are solid people who you might
go to for advice. They seem outwardly calm and organized, like they have it
all together, but they are anxious underneath. These are assertive people
who specialize in solving problems and getting things done in a highquality way—and while they work very hard, they don’t show their stress.
They are usually financially secure, highly productive, and “in control,” but
they also report feeling an underlying sense of anxiety related to the effort it
takes to achieve the sense of security they crave.
Self-Preservation Threes strive to be the ideal model of quality in
whatever they do. They want to be the best example of how to be in
whatever role they play: the best parent, the best partner, the best worker,
the best at whatever they do. They feel a need not only to be seen as good,
but also to actually be good. They do this both to achieve a sense of security
and to inspire admiration in others without being obvious about their vanity.

They want to be admired because they do things well, and they want to do
the things they do in the best way possible—not just to have a good image
that people will find attractive, but also to live up to that image. Their
tendency to adapt to a “model” also motivates them to forget their own
feelings.
Following the perfect model of how things should be done means being
virtuous, and being virtuous implies a lack of vanity. In this sense, the SelfPreservation Three “has vanity for having no vanity.”16 This means that
while this Three wants to look attractive and successful in the eyes of
others, they don’t want other people to know they want this—they don’t
want others to see that they have actively created an image to look good to
others. They don’t want others to catch them in the act of wanting or
working to look good because they have an ethic that says that “good,” or
virtuous, people are not vain. Some Self-Preservation Threes are aware (and
will admit) that they want people to admire them for their good image—
though, generally, they want to keep this a secret—but some SelfPreservation Threes believe so firmly that it is wrong or superficial to want
the approval of others that they won’t admit this desire even to themselves.
These are people who want to be so perfect that it’s not in their code of
honor to allow for vanity.
In denying the presence of vanity, the Self-Preservation Three represents
the countertype of the three Three subtypes—that is, this Three is the
“counter-passional” type, the Three that doesn’t necessarily look like a
Three. Though these Threes are motivated out of vanity, just like the other
Threes, they deny their vanity to some extent, and so their character is
shaped more around going against the energetic pull of vanity. And there is
a natural opposition between the vain desire to attract attention and a
primary instinctual drive toward security and self-preservation. Unlike
Social Threes, who will more openly brag about their accomplishments,
Self-Preservation Threes avoid talking about their positive characteristics
and high-status credentials because they believe it’s bad form to advertise
their strong points, even if they also want others to see them as successful.
They may be either modest or falsely modest.
In terms of the mental habit of deception, this subtype is also antideception in that they try to tell the truth. The deception in this Three comes
at a more unconscious level; when it comes to knowing their true

motivations, Threes often confuse their image-based reasons for doing
things with their real feelings and convictions.
Self-Preservation Threes display a strong workaholic tendency and are
motivated to work very hard to achieve security. They have a compulsion to
be self-reliant and to feel in control of their lives. They also feel responsible
for making everything happen, and can even have a sense of omnipotence.
Along with their need for control and their underlying anxiety, they may
experience a sense of panic when they need help or lose autonomy.
The passion for security in this subtype leads them to oversimplification
in life, reducing their focus and interest to what is “practical and useful.”
These individuals have an imperative need to know they can handle it all
and that all will be good for everyone surrounding them. They don’t show
weakness. They may think things like, “I have to do everything, because I
do it better.” Situations that feel beyond their control can leave them
confused and lost internally, causing them to freeze up, and in an effort to
reestablish control, they can become invasive. These are the most rigid of
the Threes.
With so much energy focused on work and efficiency and security, there
can be little mental and emotional space left for these Threes to be able to
engage deeply with others. Though they may work hard to maintain
relationships, they may have trouble making deep connections. When SelfPreservation Threes—especially less self-aware Self-Preservation Threes—
do make connections, they can be superficial. They can view feeling their
emotions as a waste of time, and this inhibits their ability to connect in
intimate relationships, since a true relationship comes through each person
being in touch with their feelings and their “real self.”
It can be hard for a Self-Preservation Three to be recognized as a Three.
They may be easily confused with Ones or Sixes. This Three looks like a
One in that the type is rigid, responsible, and self-sufficient. These Threes,
like Ones, try to be a model of virtue in the things they do. They can be
distinguished from Ones in that they move at a faster pace, pay attention to
creating an image (even when they don’t acknowledge it), and conform to a
perfect model of how to be as judged by social consensus, not according to
internal standards of right and wrong (as Ones do). They differ from Sixes
in that they are fundamentally image-oriented and work harder in response
to insecurity, while Sixes find protection in other ways. And while Threes

may question their sense of identity, they generally don’t allow their
productivity to get slowed down by too much doubt or questioning.
Virginia, a Self-Preservation Three, speaks:
I’ve always been an achiever. In preschool I finished tasks so
early that I was assigned to help others in order to stay engaged.
By first grade, the school counselor explained to my proud
parents that my insistence on perfect homework and exemplary
behavior were early predictors of later anxiety. I have worked
incredibly hard throughout my career and am now an officer of a
Fortune 500 company. Married and divorced twice, my pattern
was three to five years of being the perfect wife, followed by
emotional exhaustion and an angry husband. Vulnerability or
relying on others makes me uncomfortable. I love being counted
on to tackle difficult challenges and strive to be hyperresponsible, fair, and generous. Although I crave admiration for
these traits, I avoid seeming to care about superficial
appearances. I need to be the good traits. When I first studied the
Enneagram, I rejected the idea that I could be an imageconscious Three. I made myself a Six, even “performing” once as
a model Six on an Enneagram workshop panel. My goal now is
balance: vulnerability (versus fierce autonomy) and stillness
(versus overactive doing).

The Social Three: “Prestige”
The Social Three has a desire to be seen and to have influence with people.
This Three acts out vanity through the desire to shine before the whole
world: Social Threes enjoy being on stage. This subtype is the most vain of
the Threes, and the biggest chameleon.
The name given to this subtype is “Prestige,” which reflects the idea of
needing everybody’s admiration and applause. This Three, more than the
other two subtypes, likes and needs to be recognized, so they tend to be
more out in front, basking in the spotlight. As children, it was typically
important for Social Threes to “show” something, to look good and
demonstrate competence in doing things, to get love. Support most likely
came in the form of an approving “look” from parents.

Social Threes are socially brilliant. They know how to talk to people and
how to climb the social ladder. These Threes feel a need to frame words
carefully to get the maximum benefit, which is measured in terms of
making the right impression, getting what they want, and reaching their
goals. Their fuel is social success, though what exactly constitutes
“success” can vary depending on the history and context of the individual
Social Three. Some show intelligence, culture, or class; others have degrees
and titles; and others have material symbols of social status—a nice house,
an expensive car, designer clothes, or expensive watches.
The Social Three is very concerned with competition and winning. This
is the most competitive Three. They are also focused on power, whether or
not they are the one who has it. They tend to be demanding and
authoritarian, though these characteristics may be hidden behind a
presentation that is smooth, decorous, and humorous. Social Threes may
view others in terms of how they potentially further or block the process of
reaching their goals. They look at things in terms of how they can exert
control over them, and they don’t allow themselves to be surprised by life.
The Social Three is also the most aggressive of the Threes, possessing a
strong and assertive character. Because they are good at numbing out their
feelings, they can—in the extreme—be cold.
Social Threes have a corporate mentality and a passion for doing the job
in the best way it can be done—especially in terms of outward appearances.
They think about what is best for the group, especially in terms of what will
sell, what looks good, and what will reflect well on them. Doing what
works for the group also works to further their image of success. For the
Social Three, image and moneymaking may override good intentions or
virtuous actions. In the current age, corporations are primarily oriented
toward making money above all else, and this is reflected in the Social
Three’s concern with finding an efficient way to meet corporate goals and
enhance the bottom line, which may or may not take into account the
destructive consequences for others in a wider sense.
This Three also has a lot of confidence in leading a group where they
want to go. If a leader is not leading a group well enough, the Social Three
can feel a strong desire to take over, as it can be frustrating for them to see
the way forward and not be able to guide people in a more efficient or
successful way. The Social Three enjoys being at the center of things.

These Threes have a highly developed talent for image-making and a
strong ability to sell themselves (or whatever product they might want to
promote). According to Naranjo, these Threes look so good, there’s almost
a sense that they have no faults. It’s hard to see their flaws because they do
such a good job at creating the right image. They look so good and seem to
do things so well that any sense of there being a problem or of anything
being left out is overshadowed.
However, Social Threes do feel anxiety about being overexposed. They
feel vulnerable to being seen as having no worth. Because they place so
much importance on making a good impression, criticism can be
devastating to them, though they aren’t likely to show it. Wanting to look
good also means it can be hard for them to fully reveal themselves to others,
so they may feel a need to keep people at bay. They want so much to be
seen positively, and so they can fear that people might see through their
image if they get too close. It can be hard for them to open up and let up on
managing their image. This strong need to look good can also prevent
Social Threes from knowing and being connected to their real selves and
their real feelings.
Social Threes aren’t likely to be confused with other types, as this Three
is in many ways the most obvious Three, especially in terms of how Threes
have historically been characterized in Enneagram books.
William, a Social Three, speaks:
When I was young, I lived with my grandmother and hung out
with the older guys. I wanted to be accepted by them because of
the prestige that came with the image. Whenever they chose sides
for football, I was one of the first players chosen. One day during
an intense neighborhood game, I was playing quarterback. I
called a rollout right fake double reverse pass. I was supposed to
hit my cousin Robert on a post pattern but I faked the pass, pulled
the ball down, and started to run. One guy had a good angle on
me, but I was faster. As he got close to me I made a cut and went
behind him and scored a touchdown. I heard one of the older guys
say, “Damn, Sonny is good!” I felt drawn to the game because I
knew it was something I could do well. The praise from the older
guys confirmed what I needed to hear and made me feel special.

After that day, socially and athletically, I knew I wanted to be at
the top of the food chain.
I continued to excel at football and eventually became a
professional in the NFL. As a running back people often asked me
how I could I take the punishment play after play. When you play
football on any level, you can’t do it half-assed, you have to be all
in or not at all. Some call it internal fortitude or guts, others may
equate it to will…I call it heart! I learned that it took hard work
to come back again and again and succeed at the game on the
highest level, and I was prepared to do it. The desire for this sense
of being “Somebody” that came with playing football was huge.
To be a part of something bigger, to get results and achieve
success on that big a stage, was the fuel that drove me. Years
later, through therapy and learning the Enneagram, I’ve changed
a lot. I’ve realized authentic self-acceptance doesn’t come
through what I do or how I look to others; it’s an inside job.

The Sexual Three: “Charisma”
The victory or goal that the Sexual Three subtype is interested in (that
expresses this Three’s vanity) is one of sex appeal and beauty rather than
money or prestige—but they are just as competitive in pursuing these goals
as a business executive is in work matters. In this Three, vanity is not
denied (as with the Self-Preservation Three) or embraced (like the Social
Three); rather, it’s somewhere in between, being employed in the service of
creating an attractive image and promoting important others.
The Sexual Three is sweet and shy and not as extroverted as the Social
Three—especially when it comes to speaking about himself. It’s hard for
these Threes to promote themselves, so they often put the focus on others
they want to support.
Although they are just as capable as the other Threes of achieving
worldly success through competence and hard work, these Threes don’t feel
the need to achieve goals in the external world because their focus is much
more on pleasing and making themselves attractive as a way of earning
love. They see their accomplishments in the successes and happiness of the
people around them.
Although Ichazo called this type “Masculinity/Femininity,” Naranjo
explains that this is not Hollywood-style masculinity or femininity, or even

necessarily a very sexualized masculinity or femininity. This type is more
concerned with having an attractive presentation as a man or a woman—
and, subtly at times, with pleasing others by being attractive in a classically
masculine or feminine way. And while Threes are heart types, in this
subtype the pleasing may occur less through emotional connection or sexual
seductiveness and more through a mental connection or enthusiastic
support. Naranjo changed the name to “Charisma” to reflect the special way
Sexual Threes motivate and excite the admiration of others through a
quality of “personal magnetism.”17
Sexual Threes achieve within relationships. These Threes are pleasers
and helpers; they tend to work hard in support of someone else, expending a
lot of energy in promoting others. Sexual Threes can be very ambitious and
hardworking, but it’s always to make someone else look good. Often this
Three doesn’t seem like a Three because they are not so focused on their
own status and achievement, but for them it’s more about being attractive
and supporting others—it’s enough for them to be beautiful; they don’t have
to achieve to get love. It’s the pleasing that brings approval or love, so they
don’t have to be conventional achievers.
Sexual Threes put a lot of energy into seducing and pleasing others. They
may have a fear of disappointing others, and so they justify themselves with
excuses to avoid confrontation. People with this subtype may have fantasies
about the “ideal partner,” and they may want to change their partner to be
like they would like him or her to be. They may have fantasies of waiting
for “Prince Charming” (or “Princess Charming”) and living “happily ever
after.”
These Threes tend to be oriented toward pleasing others in the sense of
having a family or team mentality. They may focus narrowly on what is
good for the family (at home or at work) and project the image of someone
who is good in this way.
Because so much depends on their being attractive to others, Sexual
Threes think they need to be good and perfect to be loved. They tend to be
very helpful to prove their lovability—they aspire to have the image of the
“best lover” or the “perfect wife.”
Attaining love or desire from others becomes a goal, an achievement, a
conquest for Sexual Threes. To support this, they have a passion for
projecting a handsome, pretty, or sexy image. They feel an urgent need to
be looked at and recognized as attractive by people they want to attract

(romantically)—perhaps reflecting a lack of attention and admiration from
their mother or father.
In this Three there is a sense of disconnection from feelings and from the
real self. They often have no real contact with themselves or others. This
disconnection is emotional, sexual, and physical. One Three with this
subtype commented, “it’s like we put out an ‘Out to Lunch’ sign.” This is
the main issue for Sexual Threes. They typically experience a feeling of
emptiness, like a void. This Three experiences an empty feeling in terms of
having a lack of a clear sense of self or identity. This is related to the fact
that the Sexual Three experiences difficulty in being, feeling, and
expressing authentically. While they may be very attractive, they may also
have low self-esteem and be unable to love themselves. In the face of this,
they may “put on a good face” and look sweet and complacent while hiding
their strength as a way to look good for others.
The Sexual Three is the most emotional of the Threes, so you are more
likely to see them expressing their feelings. This Three doesn’t wear the
kind of social mask that a Social Three wears. There is a deep sadness
within the Sexual Three. They often had a difficult early life, and they use
“disconnection” from themselves as a way to forget, or to make up for and
minimize, past abuses. There is a lot of fear of feeling emotional pain and
sorrow, and so they learn to disconnect from their deeper emotional
experience. They also experience criticism as very threatening, as it
destroys their mask of being a “perfectly good person.”
Sexual Threes can look like Twos or Sevens. They can look like Twos
because they seek to connect with others through being pleasing and
attractive. They differ from Twos, however, in that they focus more on a
specific image of physical attractiveness and less on shape-shifting, prideful
self-elevation, and meeting emotional needs. They may be mistaken for
Sevens in that they tend to be positive and enthusiastic in their support of
others. They can be excellent cheerleaders. However, while Sevens are
fundamentally self-referencing, Threes reference others as a way of
determining how to be. Threes are more disconnected from themselves,
while Sevens typically know what they need and want.
Tadeo, a Sexual Three, speaks:

Ever since I can remember, I have always done things with the
intention of attracting the attention of others. Though I was
somewhat shy, it was easy for me to dazzle people. I learned to
draw others in without talking. We don’t have cheerleaders in
Argentina, but if we did, I’d have been one for sure. I strived to be
charismatic, loving, pleasing, enthusiastic, and above all, an
exciting and desirable person everyone wanted to be around.
I have to admit that all my life I’ve only looked at myself through
the mirror of others. And one thing was pretty clear to me:
nobody liked the ugly. As a child, people used to say I was
perfect, cute, and pretty. I was like a doll that my parents showed
the world—but as time went by, they were so overwhelmed with
their problems (and three more children) that they stopped
looking at me; especially my mom. From then on, I developed an
extreme intolerance for going unnoticed. I had a neurotic need to
please and be liked, and a neurotic vulnerability to flattery that
made me “sell myself” to anyone who said nice things to me.
Many times I engaged in abusive relationships without noticing I
was being abused.
Thus arose my mania to present only what was beautiful about me
and hide anything others might consider ugly. This led to selfalienation and to living in a fantasy in which I was the star of a
Hollywood film. At the same time, my constant focus on the
outside created a sense of hollowness inside, a void within myself
that was impossible to bear. Looking only at myself from the
outside in, I became totally disconnected from myself to the point
of not knowing what I felt at all. On the outside I could be
charming, sweet, and seductive, but on the inside (and in intimate
relationships) I was cold, uncaring, hard, and totally lacking in
empathy.
Finding the “ideal” partner became an obsession. I cared about
success, image, work, and all those other things we Threes
typically care about, but they didn’t mean anything to me if I
didn’t have someone to share them with. I deceived myself into
thinking that love was the answer to everything.

When I began my spiritual journey, the two biggest issues I faced
were the meaninglessness of my life and my inability to feel the
effects of the abuse that I had suffered years earlier due to my
physical, emotional, and sexual disconnection from myself. It was
painful to realize that I was like a cheap Easter egg: decorated
with frosting on the outside and completely hollow on the inside.

“The Work” for Type Three:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS THREES WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of cutting themselves off from the love they
want and crowding out their real feelings by slowing down, making room
for the vulnerability of “just being,” and getting in touch with their real self.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. Sometimes it can be hard for Threes to recognize the necessity
of self-work because the defensive patterns of their personality are so
aligned with what society values. They may not see that they have
cultivated an image that blocks them from growing, because that image is
so successful in convincing everyone of their “worth.” For this reason, the
Enneagram can be an important way of seeing through the surface appeal of
their personality to its limiting nature.
For Threes, growth work involves observing the ways they amp up their
“doing” to avoid feeling; exploring the ways they live through their image
and lose touch with who they are beyond their persona; and making active
efforts to access what they really think and feel separate from the
impression they want to make on others. It is particularly important for
them to learn to access their real feelings, balance out doing with being, and
appreciate who they really are and not just the images they construct.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Threes can notice, reflect
upon, and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Threes take note of the things they think,
feel, and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:
Working hard to support a (narrow) focus on tasks, goals, and achievement

Observe how you prioritize work tasks and goals to the exclusion of other
elements of life. Notice what seems most important to you as you go
through your day and observe how attached you are to your “list of things
to do.” Note how driven you are to get to your goals, and what kinds of
things you do to clear your path of obstacles. Observe your competitive
tendencies and be honest with yourself about how important winning is and
to what lengths you will go to be the best. Observe what role achievement
plays in your everyday life and what you do to reach your goals.
Constructing and maintaining a specific image to impress others

Observe all the ways you evaluate your audience for the clues you use to
design the right image. Notice when you need attention, and what it’s about.
Note how you strategize to construct a specific image. What kinds of things
do you think about? What kinds of things do you do to manage your
presentation? How might you falsify yourself (present yourself in ways that
differ from what you really think or do) to conform to the image you want
others to have of you? Observe how you feel when you succeed in getting a
positive response to your image from others.
Doing without stopping to avoid feeling

Observe the pace at which you work and the ways you try to keep moving
and avoid slowing down. Note when you speed up your activity level and
what might be happening that drives that intensification of “doing.” Notice
what you do to avoid having any gaps in your schedule that might allow
feelings to surface, and note any anxiety you feel if you have an inadvertent
gap in activity. If there is a slowdown and feelings come up, notice what
that experience is like and how you respond. Observe what happens inside

you if or when feelings do arise. What is that like? Or, if you never (or
almost never) allow deeper feelings to surface, note how you suppress them
and what motivates you to keep your feelings at bay.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Threes observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Threes can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they can consider to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns:
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help Type Threes cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns and how they
operate as coping strategies, Threes have the opportunity to become more
aware of how and why they work so hard to achieve and maintain a
particular image to attract attention and admiration. If Threes can tell the
story of their early life and look for the reasons that motivate their drive to
achieve and manage their image—perhaps to prove their value through an
active implementation of a desired self-image—they can have more
compassion for themselves and recognize how these patterns serve deeper
needs. When Threes gain insight into why they work so hard and strive to
look so good, it can help them see how these strategies operate as a
protection, but also how they keep Threes trapped in a limited “acorn-self,”
even if their acorn shells look really shiny and attractive.
What painful emotions are the Type Three patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic

anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. Threes adopt a strategy that allows them to avoid and
“numb out” painful emotions so that they don’t threaten their ability to
work hard and achieve goals. Aside from impatience and anger, some
Threes may not feel much at all. Difficult feelings related to needing
attention and not getting it, not being seen in positive ways for who they are,
and having to earn love can be conveniently bypassed through an
unswerving focus on doing. By only acknowledging and expressing
“correct” feelings, Threes steer clear of consciously attending to any
feelings related to inadequacy or loneliness. By living for and from a
desired self-image, Threes avoid real contact with the deeper part of
themselves and the painful emotions that motivated their defensive patterns
of doing and impressing in the first place.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Three patterns operate in me now?

Through self-observation, the three kinds of Threes can begin to have a
greater awareness of how and why their defensive patterns happen in
everyday life—and in the present moment. If they can consciously catch
themselves in the act of speeding up to stay away from their own emotions,
or lying to themselves (or others) about who they are to maintain their
outward appearance, they can reflect upon how these patterns work to keep
them on task and focused on the central concerns of the defensive
tendencies of their personality. If they can tap into their underlying needs
for approval and admiration, they can see how their habits of looking good
and being effective keep them focused on the limited goals of their “acornself:” staying safe through maintaining a positive sense of themselves
(based on social consensus).
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Threes keep themselves from seeing?

As part of the self-reflection process, it will be important for Threes to
remind themselves about what they don’t see when their personality
programming is driving the show. When Threes are caught up in
compulsive doing, they distract themselves from seeing all of who they
really are, which is actually more worthy of love and admiration, though
they don’t see this either. Threes actively keep themselves from seeing the
inherent value of their own feelings, their human vulnerabilities, and their

desire to connect with others in an authentic way. Perhaps because Threes’
defensive patterns line up so perfectly with the values of Western culture, it
can be difficult for them to see the flaw in the strategy of proving yourself
through achieving and fitting whatever image garners the most admiration.
Threes may be so blinded by the effectiveness of their own work ethic and
image management that they totally miss the beauty and power of their real
selves.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

The irony of the Three strategy is that by trying to win others’ approval
through hard work and the manipulation of their appearance, they actually
distance themselves from the people they want to impress. It can be very
enlightening for Threes to understand how their drives to achieve and look
good actually keep them from expressing more of what’s really true (and
inherently good) about themselves. Threes can grow through seeing how
the defensive patterns that seem so right in the eyes of society—working
hard, gaining high status, and appearing attractive—actually hold them back
from receiving the deep appreciation they really crave. By not living from a
felt sense of who they really are, Threes trap themselves in the surface
appeal of their acorn shells and prevent the oak tree of all that they can
become from emerging. And they can be so convinced of the effectiveness
of their socially sanctioned strategies that they may not even know what
they are missing.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to actively think, feel, and act with more choice
and awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Threes about “what
to do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns described above in
the “self-observation” section; 2) how to use the Enneagram’s Inner Flow

arrow lines as a map of growth; and 3) how to study your passion (or
“Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite, the antidote, the
higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Three Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Working hard to support a (narrow) focus on tasks, goals,
achievement, and success
Failure can feel
intolerable to Threes, as it undercuts their whole coping strategy of earning
love by achieving success and winning. If you are a Three, try to make
some room to consider more thoroughly what might happen if you fail—
how you would feel and what you would think and what you would do. And
watch out for efforts to do a workaround—really try to confront what the
possibility of failure means to you. And if you do experience a failure, have
compassion for yourself around it; instead of seeing it as a bad thing, see it
as an opportunity to be with your vulnerability and let in what you spend so
much energy avoiding. Try to experience the feelings you have in response
to failure more consciously.
Embrace failure as a road to deepening your experience of yourself.

Reframe your definition of success. Allow yourself to question your assumptions

about what constitutes success. Open up to the idea that you can and should
be loved for who you really are, not just for what you accomplish or for the
outward, material signs of your success. Explore what you really want when
you are competing to win or achieving as a way of attracting positive
attention. Consider what a deeper sense of success might mean in terms of
your need for love and acceptance, and allow yourself to move in that
direction. Recognize that truer, more satisfying forms of “value” are
achieved through authenticity, not status and worldly achievements.
Notice what gets left out when you are driving toward your goal. When Threes are focused

on an important goal, they can put laser-like attention on what needs to
happen to get to their desired result. While this can be a strength in many
ways, it can also cause them to avoid paying attention to important facets of

their experience, like what might be happening in their internal world that
might impede their progress.

Constructing and maintaining a specific image to impress others
Question your focus on what others value as the basis for who you think you are. As Naranjo

notes, Threes suffer from an identity problem. They may have the sense that
they don’t know who they are beyond their roles and tangible
characteristics. And separate from pleasing others and performing
effectively, they may not know what they want.18 Although Threes may not
actively worry about not knowing who they are, their defensive patterns
represent a displacement of the inner sense of being with an outer search for
approval; therefore, it can be helpful to them to examine the ways in which
they construct an identity based on external ideals—to consciously question
their use of specific values and characteristics as guiding principles in how
they decide to design their public face.
Discern the difference between actions motivated by image-making purposes and those that address
real needs and desires. Locate and solidify your sense of your real self by

becoming more aware of when you do things for image-based reasons.
Regularly ask yourself, “Am I doing this because I really want to, or
because I believe it will enhance my image?” As Threes become more and
more aware of their real feelings, needs, and desires, they will need to seek
support in accepting and embracing who they really are, especially when it
differs from what they think their image should be. It can help Threes to
hear from others that they appreciate them even more when they take the
risk to feel their feelings and express more of who they are.
Discover who you are separate from your image. With so much attention and energy

going toward the development of your image, it can be difficult to realize
that this image does not equal your total self. Actively practice discerning
the difference between your image and who you really are. Work to ask and
answer the question, “Who am I if I’m not my image?” Remind yourself
that you don’t have to give up your successes in life to manifest more of
who you really are; you can be successful both in the world and on a deeply
personal level. Reckon with any fears you might have about not being
accepted by the world if you allow yourself to show up without the

protection of a social mask. Remember that you can locate your real self
through the channels of your emotions, your needs, and your vulnerabilities,
and that what you might consider to be weaknesses can be sources of
strength. Your “oak tree–Self” is fertilized when you embrace the power of
your authentic emotions and your willingness to reveal who you really are.
Remember that only the real you can be present to receive love and
acceptance. While you may think you are seeking love by creating an
image, people want to experience and love the real you, not an attractive
construction that stands in the way of you.

Doing without stopping to avoid feeling
Don’t wait for a breakdown to alert you to the need for growth. Many times, Threes don’t

recognize the need for self-work until they experience a big failure or a
breakdown of some kind. This can take the form of an unexpected bout of
depression, when their deeper feelings of sadness or loneliness break
through their relentless habit of doing. Or it can come in the form of a
physical illness or a sense of “hitting a wall” when they finally exhaust
themselves completely. Sometimes something objectively troubling
happens, and they can’t access their feelings in response to it. If you are a
Three, notice and actively question your total focus on doing before that
happens—especially if you are already feeling stress related to depression,
exhaustion, or emotional numbness. Take the risk of asking for support
from others who may not be able to see what you need because your image
hides the fact that you are in trouble.
Reclaim and value your feelings. Notice how you avoid some feelings but not

others. Allow yourself to be curious when you aren’t feeling your emotions:
why do you avoid feeling, and what might you feel if you welcomed your
emotions? Notice if doing accelerates when emotions threaten. Consciously
allow yourself the time and space to access, own, and experience your
emotions fully. Notice any fear and anxiety this brings up, and find the
support you need to work through it. Keep an eye out for any loneliness that
you might (understandably) feel related to the chronic frustration of having
to be for others or the fact that whatever successes you have can be credited
to a false self and manipulation.19 Open up to seeing how fear drives you,
whether it be a fear of failure, of exposure, or of rejection.

Increase your ability to just “be.” For Threes, developing an ability to feel and “be”

is part of the larger process of getting in touch with the real self. Challenge
yourself by trying to meditate, or try to not do anything at all—just sit there
and look out the window. If this is difficult, allow yourself to experience
how difficult it is and think about why it is so challenging. Remind yourself
that the real you shouldn’t be measured or evaluated by how much you do
—that it’s much more important to allow for more being and less doing,
because it will allow you to access your true (“oak tree”) self.

The Inner Flow for Type Three: Using the Arrow Lines to Chart
Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
define one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “growththrough-stress” point, and its “child-heart-security” point map one kind of
growth path described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can be
seen to suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow is the path of
higher development. The “growth–stress” point ahead
represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes from childhood
that must be consciously acknowledged and owned so that we
can move forward and not be held back by unfinished business
from the past. This “child–heart” point represents qualities of
security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally fall back
into as a comfort in times of stress, and now must reintegrate
consciously.

Type Three Moving Forward to Type Nine: Consciously Using the
Nine “Growth–Stress” Point for Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Threes brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Nine: allowing for being without
doing, prioritizing others and not just goals and tasks, and being connected
to people without losing yourself. Threes can find the move to Nine
difficult, and they often go there unconsciously in times of stress when they
have worked themselves to the point of collapse. But considered
consciously, Threes can use the Nine Point as a path of growth by learning
to be more in their bodies, to include different points of view when
completing a task, and to slow down and broaden their focus of attention.
Nines are particularly good at “going with the flow,” and Threes are not
usually happy unless they are directing the flow and controlling progress
toward a goal. Threes can use the Nine Point to consciously let go of their
need to control things—to have things move forward at a certain pace in a
certain way—and allow themselves to follow others more.
The Three working consciously in this way can make ready use of the
tools healthy Type Nines use: a reliance on inclusion and consensus as
important factors in getting the job done well, an ability to follow others’
lead and not always have to be the center of attention, and a sense of “gut
knowing” as a way to direct their efforts. The ability of conscious Nines to
take “right action” based on both deeply understanding others’ perspectives
and taking their own gut knowing into account in directing forward
movement can balance out the Three’s tendency to forge ahead and rush
toward a goal without stopping to consider a wider range of opinions. The

more passive stance of Type Nine can usefully counter the active approach
usually taken by Threes. And Nines’ ability to relax and just be helps
Threes learn how to slow down the doing and risk being.

Type Three Moving Back to Type Six: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Threes calls for them to reclaim their ability to
access their fears as a way of slowing down to more carefully consider the
path to their goal. In response to a lack of protection early on, Threes often
became doers, even if this required them to bury their anxieties as a way of
finding security. Young Threes may have felt like they didn’t have the
luxury of feeling their fear, so they coped by getting active to accomplish
things. A conscious return to Six can be a way for them to allow themselves
to get in touch with the fears and concerns that can force them to slow their
pace in helpful ways. Pausing to reflect on potential threats and problems
gives them more space to pay attention to their feelings and intuitions. For
these reasons, “moving back to Six” can be a healthy way for Threes to
make space for thinking through more aspects of their plans than they
usually leave time for.
Navigated consciously, a Three can use the move to Six to re-establish a
healthy balance between moving forward and pausing for reflection. They
can consciously insert a healthy round of questioning before moving ahead
so quickly, and they can make sure to assess what is happening at a deeper
level than they normally do. Focusing on what they are afraid of can be a
way for Threes to tap into a deeper emotional level within themselves,
which can also be a way to highlight their need to allow for support from
others. Threes can relax more if they don’t always need to be the one in
control and can call on the high side of Six to have more faith in others,
allowing someone else to take the lead in solving problems and providing
protection. Questioning and self-doubt can be good for Threes in that it
opens up a channel to the vulnerability they often hide behind an image of
self-confidence.20 All of these efforts to increase awareness of the move to
Six can provide Threes with a grounding in a deeper sense of themselves
that will better equip them in their forward progress toward the high side of
Type Nine.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Vanity and Aiming for Hope
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
Three, the Vice (or passion) of the type is vanity, and its opposite, the
Virtue, is hope. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to Virtue
conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion functions
within our personality and consciously work toward the embodiment of its
opposite, the more we can free ourselves from the unconscious habits and
fixated patterns of our type and evolve toward our “higher” side.
The work of Type Three centers around becoming more and more
conscious of how different forms of vanity play a role in shaping the focus
of attention and patterns of their personality. After Threes become more
familiar with their experience of vanity and develop the ability to make it
more conscious in everyday life, they can make further efforts to focus on
enacting their Virtue, the “antidote” to the passion of vanity. In the case of
Type Three, the Virtue of hope represents a state of being that they can
attain through consciously manifesting their higher capacities.
Hope is a state of trust that all will be okay, that everything will work out.
It is an experience of optimism, “an attitude of joyous openness and trusting
receptivity to what the unfolding of Being presents to us.”21 In the
“Paradise” section of Dante’s Divine Comedy, the Pilgrim goes a step further in
terms of the certainty that hope connotes when he states, “Hope is sure
expectancy of future bliss.”22 Hope is the letting go of the egoic need to
push things forward and see results, and the knowledge and trust that good
things are going to happen.
Spiritual teacher and author A. H. Almaas further explains that hope is
“the realization that Reality ‘does itself,’ independent of our imaginary
autonomy.”23 As Type Threes learn to see their vanity in action as a way of
controlling the way things happen and managing the way they appear to
others, they can begin to work against their need to control the flow of
things to achieve and impress and then they can relax into an experience of
hope. This means they start to understand that the process of life will unfold
as it will—that they don’t need to rush it along or “do” so much. When

driven by vanity, Threes know how to further their own interests, but
implicitly don’t trust that things will work out of their own accord or
develop naturally.24 When they understand the true meaning of the Virtue of
hope, they can relax and stop working so hard, as hope inspires a sense of
optimism and trust that what they desire will be fulfilled if they can stop
doing and be receptive to the natural flow of things.
To embody hope as a Three means you are able to loosen your need for
control, your need to force specific results, and your need to manage others’
vision of who you are. It means you are open and receptive to what
happens, because you have a sense of knowing that things will function as
they should according to creative forces that we can’t always see or
understand. If we have hope, and if we can allow ourselves to let go and
harmonize with the flow of things rather than take action according to the
ego’s preconceived notions of what works best, we can take a rest from all
our efforting and still be fulfilled in the end. Hope is the antidote to vanity,
because whereas vanity seeks to control events to serve the needs of the
personality, hope allows us to see from a higher perspective—allows us to
trust that everything will be okay.

Specific Work for the Three Type Three Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
The path from observing your passion to finding its antidote is not exactly
the same for each of the subtypes. The path of conscious self-work has been
characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and grace:”25 the “grit” of our
personality programming, the “grind” of our efforts to grow, and the
“grace” that comes to us from doing our work in conscious and positive
ways. Each subtype has to grind, or exert effort, against something slightly
different. This insight is one of the great benefits of understanding the
character of the three distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.
Self-Preservation Threes can travel the path from vanity to hope by slowing down

and making room for experiencing more than just what’s on their “to-do
list.” They aim for hope by leaving themselves more space to feel, and to
express those feelings, so that they can tap into the rhythms of their own
inner experience. As a Self-Preservation Three, it is important to notice
when you create rationalizations for not allowing space for deeper emotions
and relational needs. Allow yourself to find security through deep

connections with other people, not just by relying on yourself and working
hard. Allow yourself to realize that you don’t have to be responsible for
everything. Create safety through shared feelings of mutual trust, as
opposed to going it alone and working so hard to be autonomous. Learn that
your anxiety is a sign that you have deeper feelings and needs that aren’t
being addressed, and instead of working harder, take care of yourself by
listening to your real self, allowing yourself to rest, and taking refuge in
hope, the expectancy of future bliss that you don’t have to make happen all
by yourself. Allow yourself to be still, such that you can make room to have
an experience of vulnerability and more of your true self.
Social Threes can travel the path from vanity to hope by making conscious use

of setbacks, failures, and the experience of their own vulnerability to
broaden their sense of who they really are. When Social Threes can relax
their efforts to get recognition and learn to trust that people will see and
appreciate their value if they just allow themselves to embrace more of who
they are, they can release the need to control what happens and enter into an
experience guided by hope. If you are a Social Three, aiming for hope
means challenging any fears about exposure or rejection you might have
and learning to see that you are much deeper and richer than your social
mask permits you to be. Expressing more real feelings is an act of hope for
this Three because it can be so hard to let go of an imagined or idealized
self and risk that others will love who they really are. In line with this, it is
important for this Three to see failures and setbacks as an invitation to a
deeper experience of life—and a felt experience of the real self.
Sexual Threes can travel the path from vanity to hope by learning to live for

themselves and not for a real or imagined partner. This Three moves toward
hope by getting to know and experience more of their real self. People with
this subtype are a paradox: beautiful, enthusiastic friends and supporters
who don’t love and support themselves the way they do others. This Three
can move toward hope by learning to put the same faith and love toward
their own self that they offer so generously to others. Launching an
intensive search for the “real self”—finding a sense of identity and trusting
that it will lead you in the right direction—is what hope is about for this
Three. If you are a Sexual Three, consciously share your feelings with the

people you support so well and know that hope will guide you toward
establishing the deep connections you long for.

Conclusion
THE THREE POINT REPRESENTS THE WAY we all focus on and identify with a
persona we mistake for our true self in a world that seems to reward a
socially acceptable image. The Three path of growth shows us how to
transform vanity into hope. By showing us the importance of learning to
dis-identify from a limiting “acorn shell” personality, no matter how
attractive or socially brilliant, the Three path of awakening through hope
guides us in shaking off our outer coverings, breaking open to our real
feelings, and becoming the “oak tree-Self” that we are meant to be. In each
of the Type Three subtypes we see a specific character who teaches us what
is possible when we can turn our vanity into a fully awake ability to let go
of the need to manage how we appear in the eyes of others and just be
through the alchemy of self-observation, self-development, and selfknowledge.

CHAPTER 10

The Point Two Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
Humility is not thinking less of yourself; it’s thinking of yourself less.
—C. S. Lewis

TYPE TWO REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who seeks to please
others as a way to evoke affection. The drive to win others’ approval
through indirect methods, such as seduction and strategic giving, is a way to
obtain emotional and material support without having to ask for it. This
strategy also provides a way to try to get others to take care of you while
still defending yourself against the pain of having someone important reject
a direct request to meet a need.
Twos can be of either gender, of course, but the Type Two archetype
mirrors the Jungian concept of “anima,” or the inner feminine. Jung
described the anima as being like a “glamorous, possessive, moody, and
sentimental seductress.”1 Related to the Great Mother or the Great Goddess
archetypes, the archetypal feminine principle represents fundamental
human ideas about the all-powerful, numinous woman who provides vital
nourishment, and displays the feminine qualities of warmth, receptivity,
softness, emotional sensitivity, and openness to the other.2
An element of this Two archetype can also be found in the caricature of
the “Jewish mother” who is superficially selfless as a way to exercise
emotional control over everyone close to her. It also fits the pattern of the
classic “codependent”—the person who becomes addicted to supporting
and enabling an addict. For each, below the surface, the giving is not an
altruistic kind of helpfulness. These individuals find self-worth in being
needed by those they value and (unconsciously) seek to get their own needs
met in return. Their aid constitutes a strategic means of getting needs met
through promises of reciprocal care, which sometimes involves promising
more than can be delivered.3

Type Twos are thus the prototype for that part in all of us that adopts an
elevated or idealized view of ourselves and our ability to make others like
us. A tendency toward self-aggrandizement or self-inflation undergirds the
Type Two’s persona. Twos often appear boundlessly and indispensably
generous, helpful, attractive, and supportive. The false self that Twos model
is one seeking to create positive connections with others through an
attractive and inviting front.
This false self engineers positive emotional alignment with people who
then provide support for survival. Once a friendly relationship has been
established, that human link may be used as a resource in a time of need.
The Two archetype illustrates the idea that when you want something from
others to support your well-being, “you can catch more flies with honey
than with vinegar;” charm and helpfulness in the present provide a good
groundwork for asking for favors in the future.
The natural strengths of Type Twos include their genuine ability to listen
to others, empathize with their feelings, and meet their needs. They are
usually cheerful, optimistic, warm, and friendly. Twos are naturally
practiced in the art of using positive communication to create rapport. They
can be very diplomatic and skilled at delivering messages in ways that
people can hear. Twos’ particular “superpower” is that they can be excellent
friends and will often go to great lengths to take care of and support loved
ones. Twos can also be driven and energetic, extremely competent people
who get a lot of things done and strive to do things well, especially as a way
to impress others.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Twos’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel.” Their focus on
appearing to be powerful enough to “do anything” for others leads to selfinflation. This inflation is a form of pride—the passion of the Two. As we’ll
see, this pride also masks the Two’s denial of the very needs that motivate
seduction. As a result, they end up denying their own needs and losing a
clear sense of how they really feel.
Twos can be upbeat, friendly, and genuinely giving. But at times they
may get in their own way by overdoing their focus on shape-shifting to
please others. For instance, Twos can’t help imagining that other people are
as sensitive to criticism as they are. So they may sugarcoat or shade the
truth out of a fear of hurting someone. Other times, a Two’s cheeriness can

feel false, as it sometimes functions as an overcompensation to mask
sadness, resentment, or disappointment.
To fully understand this archetype, it is important to understand the
darker side of this “pleasing” character, who is similar to the beautiful,
seductive, yet dangerous femme fatale. The help and support that Twos provide
is strategic aid, though they are not always aware of their underlying motives.
Reciprocity is the key to this survival strategy. Twos operate on the usually
unspoken assumption that “if I take care of you, you will take care of me.”
The Type Two Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey: Calypso
At the beginning of The Odyssey, Odysseus is stranded on
Calypso’s island. It is the penultimate place he visits before he
arrives home. As he tells his story, we learn that this island is the
eighth location Odysseus has traveled to on his journey home
after the Trojan War.
Homer describes Calypso as a “shining goddess,” a “queenly
nymph,” and “bright among goddesses.”4 She is beautiful and
elegantly feminine. Calypso is the archetypal nurturer. She
pampers Odysseus, giving him the best food and supplying him
with everything he needs. But she also wants something from
Odysseus: she doesn’t want him to leave. Odysseus wants to go
home to his wife, Penelope, but Calypso wants to marry him and
make him immortal like she is.
Until Zeus himself orders Calypso to let Odysseus go home, she
detains him in her island paradise, providing him with all manner
of sensuous pleasures. Her goal is to seduce him into giving up
his dream of homecoming. Her support and hospitality are
extraordinary, but they also imprison Odysseus. How could he
want to return to his mortal wife, when he could have an immortal
goddess? Why would he want to undergo the many hardships he
has to endure to get home, when he could be the lord of Calypso’s
household and be immortal? Under the guise of helping, she
wants to control him and own him forever.5 But because
Calypso’s main motive in the relationship is something she wants
for herself rather than the true interest of the other person, she
can’t get what she really needs.

When Calypso finally allows Odysseus to leave, she shows the
high side of the Two archetype. With the understanding that he is
leaving her, she nonetheless helps him prepare for his journey.
With no strings attached, and knowing that he will not be
reciprocating as she has wanted him to, she is finally able to love
him in a more genuine way.

The Type Two Personality Structure
AS PART OF THE “HEART-BASED” or “emotion-based” triad of types, the
personality structure of the Two is associated with the emotion of sadness or
grief. Twos have a focus on creating a specific image of themselves. Each of
the heart type personalities (Two, Three, and Four) relate to other people
primarily through emotional empathy. The “feeling sense” these types share
gives these individuals a heightened need to connect with others and an
ability to read interpersonal situations well on the emotional-relational
level. Relationships are in the foreground of their attention, and so the heart
types are especially aware of the image they believe they need to present to
attract the love or approval of others.
While Type Fours overdo an attachment to grief, and Type Threes
underdo grief, Twos are in conflict with their sadness.

The sadness at the core of the heart type personalities reflects their
feeling of not being loved for who they really are and their grief over
having lost touch with their real selves. They’ve disowned who they really
are and created a specific image to try to get the love (or approval) they
need. All three of the heart types have core issues related to unmet needs to
be deeply seen, accepted, and loved for who they are. Their respective

coping strategies are designed to gain approval from other people in three
distinct ways as a substitute for the love they seek but fear they can’t get as
they are. While Threes create an image of achievement and success, and
Fours present themselves as unique and special, Twos strive to have a
likable, pleasing image.
Pleasing the important people in their lives seems like the route to
survival and success to Twos, who use their “heart intelligence” to actively
and automatically (without thinking) “read” the people around them and
align with what they perceive as their moods, needs, and preferences.6 In
lining up with or trying to create a connection with others by meeting their
needs and accommodating their feelings, Twos strive to achieve positive
relations with important others to support their sense of well-being.
Type Two is sometimes called “The Giver” or “The Helper,” but they
don’t offer their “help” consistently or unconditionally to just anyone.
Fundamental to this type is an often-unconscious habit of strategic giving to
make people indebted to them. Twos naturally feel compelled to give to
others, and they often believe they do so in a sincere and straightforward
way. But the pattern of this personality is to give as part of a calculus in the
service of seduction, self-elevation, and self-interest. Self-awareness for
them involves recognizing how much of their giving reflects insecurity
about their own perceived worth and lovability, rather than a simple desire
to help without expectation of reward.
Understanding this dynamic of insecurity and “giving to get” puts us in
touch with the sadness at the core of the Type Two character. For these
individuals, this sorrow comes from having the sense that they are not loved
for who they are but for what they do for others.
Like Calypso, Twos can free themselves from this pattern by humbly
giving up their power to seduce others into meeting their needs. When they
do so, they reveal the graciousness of true generosity and open up the
possibility of receiving the love they have longed to know.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type Two
The archetypal story of the Two begins with an experience, often very early
in childhood, of some crucial need not being met. For instance, this history
often includes inexperienced or overwhelmed caregivers failing to provide
some aspects of basic love and care. This failure could include all kinds of

basic needs, but especially early emotional needs, like the need to feel
recognized and loved unconditionally.
From this experience of unfulfilled need, Twos adapt to others based on
the idea that their needs are too much for other people and that they can’t be
loved as they are. Twos develop a survival strategy in which they repress
their needs in favor of tuning in to the needs of others. The effort of being
super-supportive of others, they hope, will motivate others to meet their
unstated needs in reciprocal fashion.
The whole Two personality can be seen as a strategic defense against the
humiliation of having to acknowledge need. Twos’ early experience that
their needs are “too much” causes them to subconsciously conclude that
because their needs are neglected, they themselves are somehow not worthy
of love or care. From then on, any open refusal of need fulfillment can
revive the early psychic pain caused by those needs going unsatisfied in the
first place. Twos experience this refusal as humiliation because it confirms
their image of themselves as unworthy.
This initial scenario also leads the Two to develop a range of unconscious
strategies to get their needs met through indirect means so they can avoid
the painful experience of their needs (and their “self”) being directly
rejected. On one hand, asking for needs to be met seems unthinkable to the
Two, as it seems sure to invite further rejection. On the other hand, the Two
finds that repressing these needs seems to both reduce the internal pressure
of unmet need and make them easier for others to be around. (Thus, a Two
might think: “If this person I want to connect with doesn’t like angry
people, I just won’t be angry!” or “If the parent that I need to take care of
me doesn’t like sad people, I will get rid of my sadness.”) By becoming
what others want them to be in order to gain their approval or affection, the
Two builds a personal network of positive connections to (hopefully
indirectly) meet the needs they have so carefully hidden from view.
This early coping strategy protects the Two, but at considerable cost.
Underneath their upbeat and friendly exterior, Twos often feel a deep sense
of sadness that comes from believing that they are unlovable. This puts
Twos in the unfortunate position of needing to disown parts of themselves
to ensure that others like them. This habit of repressing needs can make
Twos sensitive or even averse to being dependent on others, even in normal,
nonintrusive ways. But as flattering and supporting others to earn love or
approval becomes habitual, the Two gradually becomes more and more

defended against the risk of potential rejection, and less and less able to
open up and receive love from others in a genuine way.
Chris, a Type Two, describes his childhood situation and the
development of his coping strategy:
I was an only child and the only grandchild on my father’s side of
the family. My grandparents took care of me a lot when I was very
young because both of my parents worked full time. Two years
after I was born, my parents and I moved out of the United States
to pursue better economic opportunities overseas. This move
involved leaving my father’s extended family and moving to
Greece. When we moved back to the U.S. again seven years later,
I had to leave behind my mother’s extended family that had raised
me from the time I was two until I was nine.
While I don’t recall consciously feeling the pain of specific unmet
needs, I know that being passed to different grandparents, not
always having my parents around to take care of me, and losing
the support of two different sets of caretakers before the age of ten
had an effect on me. On the one hand, I got a lot of attention
because I was an only child, but on the other hand, I think I may
have felt rejected or abandoned when my parents weren’t around
and when I had to leave people (twice) whom I had come to
depend on.
My mother is a very critical Type One and my father is a very
protective Type Eight. From early on, I adopted a strategy of
pleasing people, primarily through entertainment (I could—and
still do!—sing at the drop of a hat). This ensured I was the center
of attention (and not ignored) and bonded to others in some way.
(It also was my way of distracting people from the loud political
arguments du jour.) I projected a happy exterior and learned to
control my own anger based on the coaching my mom would give
my Eight father—but this “tempering the temper” advice also
caused me to hide or squelch my negative emotions. Not
expressing negative feelings was also reinforced by my
grandmother, who was always concerned about “what the
neighbors would think.”

As an only child raised primarily around adults. I was
encouraged to be independent and self-sufficient. In elementary
school, I always carried extra supplies to offer to other
classmates. I often felt like an outsider—because I had grown up
in another country and was the new kid who spoke with a foreign
accent—and so tried to make friends by offering these gifts of
supplies to anyone who might need them. I quickly lost the British
accent I had acquired living abroad as I wanted to conform to the
dominant culture to be accepted. Being nice, helpful, and
generous was the only way I could come up with to get along with
everyone and have them like me. I also hid my homosexuality
because I didn’t have any role models to let me know that it was
possible to be gay and still be liked and accepted. To that end, I
even waited until I had moved out of my parents’ house to come
out to them, for fear of being rejected by them while I was still
living there (and so still needed them).

The Main Type Two Defense Mechanism: Repression
When there is suffering, an anesthetic serves a purpose.7 The Two’s primary
defense mechanism is repression, which operates like a kind of psychological
anesthetic. Repression consigns specific perceptions or emotions to
unconsciousness. It helps to insulate a person’s psyche from a deeper source
of pain so that the personality can keep the person functioning. Repression
leaves the wound untouched, but the person is able to tolerate it—
unfortunately, other feelings, not just pain and humiliation, get anesthetized
in the process.
Twos habitually repress feelings that might impede achieving a
connection with important others. For instance, Twos often repress their
anger because they believe it may create a separation from—or, worse yet,
prompt disapproval from—their loved ones.
Put another way, when a Two experiences an internal conflict between
what they are feeling or thinking and what they believe they need to present
to form a connection with an important person, they will repress their real
thought or feeling to protect the relationship. They appear to “get rid of” the
parts of themselves they believe someone won’t like. This habit is why
some people can experience Twos as fake or inauthentic, especially in
charged situations.

Repression is the defense mechanism that automatically anesthetizes
Twos from the pain of early needs not being met. It is also the mechanism
for pushing unappealing emotions like sadness, anger, and envy out of sight
in the hope that others will meet the needs and desires they are too proud to
express. As what is repressed inevitably leaks out, however, Twos can often
be experienced as “needy” by those who can observe this leakage in ways
that Twos can’t because their disowned needs have become a “blind spot”
(or Shadow element) of their personality.

The Type Two Focus of Attention
It is important to note that Twos focus their attention on key people and
relationships without really “deciding” to do so; rather, they tend to “read”
people and pay attention to their needs and feelings automatically. Twos
also habitually focus on managing their own presentation based on what
they think other people will like. Twos are shape-shifters, and the shape
they shift into depends on the data they collect from reading the people they
want to attune to. For instance, if someone a Two wants to be closer to likes
baseball, they will highlight the fact that they also like baseball, and they
may even study up on what is going on in the world of baseball.
Since energy follows attention, Twos end up putting a lot of energy into
meeting others’ needs and suppressing their own. This outward focus on
others draws Twos’ attention away from their own internal experience
(feelings, needs, desires) and their own “sense of self.” Twos often lack a
clear sense of their own emotions, needs, and preferences, but they can
easily read and tune in to the emotions, needs, and preferences of others.
Even though they prioritize positive connections with important others,
Twos can end up not being very present in their “closest” relationships.
Their focus is on doing for others and seducing the as-yet-unseduced, not on being who
they are and being present in their own experience of life and relationships.
Thus, paradoxically, others can find these “Givers” preoccupied or
unavailable for genuine personal contact in important moments. They focus
much time and energy on achieving relationships, but Twos often feel they
can’t risk being present to enjoy them.
It would be a mistake to assume that all generosity and service Twos
offer is strategic. Likewise, though, we can’t overlook the amount of
attention Twos consciously devote to winning friends and cultivating
influence. Twos are good at finding ways to get what they want, often

indirectly, through manipulation. Or prevarication. Or even creative
orchestration. Twos can be quite bossy and powerful at times, especially
when stressed, when operating behind the scenes, or when secure with those
around them.

The Type Two Emotional Passion: Pride
Pride is the passion—the specific emotional motivation—of the Type Two.

“Pride” in this sense does not mean the healthy, good feeling we have about
ourselves as when we “take pride in” a job well done. Rather it is the false
pride of self-inflation we know as one of the Seven Deadly Sins. Naranjo
describes the passion of pride as “a passion for the aggrandizement of the
self-image.”8 Pride as a “passion” is the unconscious need to puff yourself
up so you can be exactly what other people want or need. Sandra Maitri
observes, “our pride rests upon valuing ourselves and investing energy into
how we would like to see ourselves—our idealized self-image—rather than
perceiving ourselves directly, as we really are.”9
If you are a Two, seeing pride in yourself can be tricky at first. It can be
hard for Twos just learning their type to see that “the pride system” goes in
two directions: inflation and deflation. Often, Twos are more conscious of
feeling insecure and wanting approval (and never getting enough), than they
are of inflating their self-image or taking on more than they can handle.
On the inflated side, Twos feel prideful when they believe they are able
to meet everybody’s needs. Consequently, Twos take on more and more
responsibility for making others happy, even when they feel burdened or
exhausted. They tend to think, “it’s easier to do more than disappoint
someone by saying ‘no.’” Twos build up their own confidence by telling
themselves that they can meet many needs—though not their own needs,
which they ignore.
Over time, Twos may recognize the pride underlying the sense of power
they feel from their imagined capacity to meet everyone’s needs and the
sense of superiority that goes along with not having conscious needs
themselves. Pride manifests itself in Type Twos as a feeling of power in
independence—a fantasy that they do not need to depend on the very
people they have manipulated into depending on them.
When pridefully inflated, Twos see themselves as supercompetent, ready
and able to handle anything. This pride-inspired vision of indispensability

reflects the survival strategy of needing to be more than you are to
compensate for the fear that you are really less than what others see in you.
The tendency for Twos to inflate their self-image with a fantasy of
attractiveness or indispensability eventually runs into a reality that doesn’t
square with this puffed-up, false sense of self. Since “what goes up must
come down,” deflation results, and Twos adopt a diminished image of
themselves as being excessively flawed and totally inadequate or
unattractive in the eyes of others. When criticism, rejection, exposure, or
failure punctures the Two’s inflated prideful stance, Twos may feel
embarrassed that they ever entertained a puffed-up or enhanced version of
themselves.
In unconscious Twos, this regret helps repression submerge the pride
underlying the pattern, resetting it for the next cycle of inflation.

The Type Two Cognitive Mistake:
“To Get You Must Give” or “People Only Like People Who are
Relentlessly Likable”
In Chapter 1 we discussed the idea that, for each of us, personality
manifests in all three of our centers of intelligence. We all get stuck in
habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs, feelings, and actions,
and this continues even after the mental models that create our overall
perspective aren’t accurate anymore. While the passion shapes the
personality’s emotional motivations, the “cognitive mistake” is the pattern
preoccupying the personality’s thought processes.10

Type Twos’ cognitive mistake centers on the underlying assumption that
they have to seduce others into liking them. Conversely, they may think that

it is “selfish” to focus on their own needs and desires. Long after they’ve
left the early environment where their own needs weren’t seen, in which
they first learned to focus on others’ needs, Type Twos retain the belief that
responding to others’ needs is good and expressing your own needs is bad.
These habitual ways of thinking form early in life and are difficult to
change. They served a vital protective function for the developing self. But
like the acorn shell inhibits the acorn’s growth, Twos inhibit their own
growth by staying within the confines of these habitual patterns of thought,
even when the evidence suggests they should do otherwise.
Here are some key beliefs and assumptions characteristic of the Type
Two personality. They reflect different aspects of the cognitive mistake that
leads Twos to assume that they will not be lovable unless they work hard to
earn value through supporting others:

I am not lovable as I am.
I can only get affection or care by seducing others into
relationship through meeting their needs and being the person
they want me to be.
If I express my real feelings, desires, and needs (the core
attributes of my real, unlovable self), I will be rejected or
humiliated.
I don’t have as many needs as other people have.
Not having many needs myself, it’s easier to sacrifice my own
needs in the service of meeting other people’s needs (and
making them happy) than to assert any needs or desires.
Conflict produces bad feelings and disapproval and risks
damaging relationships, so it should be avoided.
I know how to make people like me. My ability to make
people like me ensures my survival and well-being.
Most people like happy people who flatter them and meet their
needs.

Most people don’t like needy people who cause trouble or
create conflict by expressing negativity, strong feelings, or
opinions.
When you give to others, they are obligated to give back to
you.
These common Two beliefs and recurring thoughts support and
perpetuate the manufacturing of a self-presentation that maximizes other
people’s positive feelings and minimize their negative opinions and
reactions.

The Type Two Trap:
“I Make People Like Me By Being Less Like Me”
As it does distinctly for each type, the cognitive fixation for Type Two leads
the personality in circles. It presents an inherent “trap” that the limitations
of the personality cannot resolve.
For Type Twos, this trap can be summarized with the quandary “I make
people like me by being less like me.” Twos inevitably lose touch with who
they really are by striving to “make others like them.” By trying to become
what they believe others will like, admire, and find attractive, they end up
disowning their needs, feelings, and preferences—the substance of who
they really are as unique and valuable individuals. Twos trap themselves by
substituting the temporary lift of approval for the real love they desperately
want. Through shifting into being the person they think others want them to
be, they lose their own sense of self, and with it their ability to be present
and to be nurtured in relationship.
Twos habitually manage their presentation so they can more easily create
a positive rapport with specific individuals, but in doing this, they get
confused about who they really are, how they really feel, and what they
really want. In this way they get caught up in a vicious cycle of shapeshifting to attract others, then needing more support and validation from the
outside to support a weakened sense of self. It’s only by taking the risk to
find out who they are—and letting go of the need to make everyone like
them—that they find their way out of the trap.

The Key Type Two Traits
Strategic Helpfulness to Create Indispensability
Twos give of themselves selectively, with the (sometimes unconscious)
expectation that they will receive something in return. This strategic “giving
to get” represents a key unconscious habit of the Two.
One of the most ego-satisfying compliments Twos can receive is that
they are indispensable. Twos feel most safe when needed by others, and so
they may regularly create situations in which others need them.
Seductiveness

Twos experience difficulty in directly asking for what they need, so they
seduce others as a way of getting what they need through the indirect routes
of charm and apparent generosity. Seductiveness develops in Twos as a way
to seek love or affirmation without asking for it directly. Naranjo speaks of
seduction not only as eroticism, but also, and even more importantly in the
case of Twos, as “seeming to have more to offer than is the case.” They
seduce through promising whatever they might need to promise to draw
someone in, but may not be able to deliver on their commitments. So while
it’s true that Twos like to be wanted, they don’t necessarily want to have to
follow through on what they might offer. As Naranjo points out, Twos tend
to live in the present, yet not in a way that represents a healthy “presentcenteredness,” but as a subterfuge, because “they don’t want to think of the
future consequences of their actions nor remember yesterday’s
commitment.”11
Emotionality and Emotional Sensitivity

Twos are naturally emotionally sensitive, yet they struggle with
emotionality—the outward manifestation of their feelings. At times a Two
might avoid negative emotions through repression, only to be overwhelmed
by them when they can no longer be repressed. Twos may become
outwardly emotional when they would prefer not to be seen as emotional.
As Naranjo explains, “there is something excessive about the expression
of emotion of E2 people, be it tender or aggressive. Their enthusiasm too
ecstatic, their fits of anger too manipulative.”12 Twos can be impossibly
cheerful as a way of overcompensating for an underlying sense of sorrow at

not getting the love they need—or overly resentful when others don’t give
them what they need.
Whether an individual Two has this overt emotionality varies depending
on the Two, but Twos all share a great capacity for feeling emotion. Twos
may also suffer from anxiety, often out of a vague sense that it’s not okay to
be who or how they are (they need to be somehow different to be
supported).
Twos can be particularly emotionally sensitive when it comes to criticism
or perceived hurts or rejections. Any message, however small, that indicates
someone dislikes them can feel crushing because their well-being is based
on how others feel about them. Twos tend to take things personally, even
when things aren’t personal, which can make it hard for others to be candid
with them. They can take others’ negative opinions of them way too much
to heart, feeling like they’ve failed in their task to achieve someone’s
positive regard.
Romanticism

Along with Type Fours, perhaps, Twos are the romantics of the Enneagram.
Their deep need for love, together with their focus on relationships as a
source of romantic satisfaction, gives them an affinity for all things
romantic, whether it be a good love story, fantasies of fulfilling experiences
with a romantic partner, or music or poetry that communicates romantic
feeling.
Hedonism and Compensatory Overindulgence

As Naranjo himself asserts, Type Two personalities can be the most
hedonistic of all the types of the Enneagram.13 Like other Two traits, this
hedonism derives from the unmet need for love and support the Two
experienced early on in life. For Twos, hedonism consists of actively
seeking pleasure and “taking in” what feels good. Twos seek pleasure in
this way to satisfy their unconscious needs and compensate for a deeper
sense of deprivation. Having a good time, engaging in pleasurable
activities, and overindulging generally all reflect the Two’s desire to feel
good without having to do the work of figuring out what they truly need.
The Two’s deeper need to be loved is displaced and repressed through
this search for pleasurable experiences and sensory satisfaction.

The Type Two Shadow
Because Twos stake their well-being on managing their connections with
others, they have a lot of blind spots when it comes to those relationships.
Twos often don’t recognize the need for the boundaries that are necessary to
foster the balance between freedom and contact in a healthy relationship.
For instance, Twos often don’t realize that it can be good to say no to
another’s request and that sometimes it’s best not to volunteer to help
someone else.
Twos acting unconsciously are unaware of their deep unmet need for love
and often compulsively give without limit, hoping this effort will earn
others’ affection. They cannot see that this approach often isn’t the best
path to a positive mutual connection. At its worst, Twos’ over-giving can
feel intrusive to others and burdensome for Twos even while they believe
they are “just trying to help” or “maintain the relationship.”
Especially because the Two pattern of “giving to get” can itself be a blind
spot, eventually Twos exhaust themselves and become angry if others do
not give back. This anger results directly from the fact that the Twos’ real
needs are in their Shadow and kept out of their consciousness through
repression. This anger emerges periodically—sometimes passively, and
sometimes actively—because the Two’s unmet needs conflict with his or
her unspoken, unconscious expectation of reciprocity. And because this
anger itself is repressed in service to the Twos’ desire to avoid conflict and
the threat of separation, resentment can build under the surface until it
explodes in what can seem to be highly irrational, surprising, or
manipulative fits of aggression.
A big blind spot for Twos is their sense of self—who they really are.
They often lose touch with themselves as they shape-shift to become what
they think others want them to be. The effort the false self makes to forge
connections with important others requires repressing so many needs,
feelings, and opinions that others might find unattractive, the unaware Two
will have a hard time knowing who they are and what they really feel,
think, and need.
Another Two blind spot concerns their perception of self-worth. Focusing
so much on what they think they need to be to please others often involves
dwelling on the ways in which they believe they don’t measure up. Like
Ones in this respect, Twos may thus consign some of their positive
attributes to their Shadow. Deeper down, Twos often believe they are

unlovable, though this perception and the emotions related to it may also
reside in Twos’ Shadow.
Twos often have a blind spot concerning power and authority because
their personality gives others much of the power to define their
relationships. Twos’ natural tendency is to support others in positions of
power and require a lot of external validation from those they perceive as
more powerful. So even though a Two might have the experience and
qualities to be a good leader, he or she might not pursue this role, preferring
to manage their image from a more comfortable subordinate position rather
than being the one everyone is looking to for direction. (Though the Social
Two is an exception to this.)
All of these blind spots in the Two Shadow trace back to the passion of
pride and the mechanism of repression—a very powerful combination for
pushing needs and feelings down to the deepest levels of the unconscious.
The Shadow of the Type Two Passion: Pride in Dante’s
Underworld
Dante’s Inferno provides a vivid symbolic portrayal of the
shadow side of the Type Two personality and its Passion of Pride.
In Christian cosmology, Pride is the first and fundamental sin
because it prompted Lucifer to elevate himself above his natural
level and challenge the supremacy of God. (As Naranjo describes
it, he dared “to say ‘I’ in the presence of the Only One.”14) Pride
caused Lucifer’s rebellion against his maker and his subsequent
expulsion from heaven.
The deep cone shaped cavity of Dante’s hell was created by the
prideful angel’s (Lucifer’s) fall. So in Dante’s Inferno, Pride
created the structure of Hell itself, and it is punished in its lowest
region.
The king of the vast kingdom of all grief stuck out with half
his chest above the ice … If once he was as fair as now he’s
foul and dared to raise his brows against his maker, it is
fitting that all grief should spring from him.15
Although in the Enneagram map of personality, none of the
passions is better or worse than any other, in the moral geography

of Dante’s underworld, pride is the worst of the sins. Lucifer
himself is the symbol of pride, a three-faced monster trapped
forever in a lake of ice at the very bottom of the pit. Surrounded
by rebellious giants from the Bible and classical literature, each of
the “arch-traitor’s” mouths is chewing on a famous traitor from
history. This literary image aptly depicts the far reaching harm
that Pride can do and the depth of repression Type Two
personalities may maintain to keep the Passion of Pride in the
Shadow of the unconscious.
But why is pride so bad according to Dante? Pride causes the
prideful to put their will above the will of nature (or God) and
thus subverts the natural flow of the universal order—just as
when Type Twos, motivated by the passion of pride, put their will
above that of others or nature by trying to control who likes who
and who’s doing what.

The Three Kinds of Twos:
The Type Two Subtypes
IN THE TWO PERSONALITY, pride manifests itself as a need to seduce others to
strategically meet the needs Twos disown as part of their prideful stance.
Each of the subtypes represents a specific effort to get needs met without
having to ask, though the three Type Two subtypes each display different
approaches to the driving need to seduce. In the subtypes, the passion of
pride gets channeled into three different ways of trying to get needs met:
indirectly, through others’ protection and care (Self-Preservation); by
gaining admiration and respect through one’s knowledge and abilities
(Social); or by creating an attractive image and adapting in order to woo
specific individuals (Sexual).
The Self-Preservation Two is the most childlike Two; the Social Two is
more of an adult “Power Two”; and the Sexual Two is like a force of nature,
resembling the femme fatale archetype and its male equivalent. The SelfPreservation Two seduces by being charming, playful, and cute. The Social
Two seduces groups through power and competence. The Sexual Two
employs a more classic mode of seduction: wooing others through
attractiveness and flattery, and seducing specific individuals into providing
for all their needs and wants.

The Self-Preservation Two: “Privilege” (Countertype)
This “cute” Two expresses pride and a need for protection through youthful
ways of gaining attention and affection. The unconscious strategy the SelfPreservation Two employs is to “seduce” like a child in the presence of
grown-ups. This represents both an unconscious need to be taken care of
and a sense that children are naturally lovable, inherently deserving of
affection, and usually more readily liked than adults. This Two has a
childlike quality in presentation and emotional expression—no matter how
old they are, this Two looks youthful or young. While the Sexual Two can
seem overly adult, wild, and seductive in the usual sense of the term, the
Self-Preservation Two unconsciously aims to attract love and attention
through being cute and expressing a childlike sense of need.
As humans, we have a natural love of children, a biological imperative
that ensures that we will care for children who are dependent on us for their
survival. Children want and need to be loved not for what they do for
others, but for who they are. This is a basic need of any child. So what is
prominent in the Self-Preservation Two is this pure, young need for love.
This Two “remains little” as a way of evoking care from others without
having to ask for it, just as children shouldn’t have to ask for love and care
or aren’t mature enough to articulate this kind of request directly.
Self-Preservation Twos thus unconsciously draw on the universal love of
children by adopting the stance of a cute, youthful person. This presentation
is a way of inviting people to like them and take care of them, just as a
child’s “cuteness” inspires people to love them. This is their way of
expressing the idea that, deep down, they want to be loved not for being
pleasing or giving to others, or because of qualifications, performance, or
achievements, but just because of who they are; they want to be loved for just
existing. This Self-Preservation Two pattern has this person taking the
position of the child in the family because a child’s needs naturally come
first.
The name for the Self-Preservation Two, “Privilege,” refers to the idea
suggested by this personality: “I’m young, and therefore I’m the most
important.” This reflects this subtype’s (unconscious) assertion of a kind of
childlike priority, wanting others to place a special emphasis on meeting his
or her needs. These Twos don’t want to have to prove their importance to be
important. Despite wanting to be the center of attention, they experience no

accompanying feeling of having to do anything for it. They want to be seen
without showing themselves.
Self-Preservation Twos need to feel unique and special—they have a
compulsion about being the “cute” girl or boy who is liked by everybody.
They charm or “give themselves” to others to remain the favorite. They
excel at being the teacher’s pet.
It’s less easy to see pride in this type. The Self-Preservation Two is the
countertype of the Twos; it’s a Two that doesn’t look like a Two. While the
energetic direction of the flow of the Two personality (with its focus on
seduction) is up and out toward others, the self-preservation instinct this
Two has causes them to express more ambivalence about relationship. This
Two moves toward others, but also has a “counter-move” away from others
out of a need for self-protection. This Two is tender and sweet, but more
guarded than the other Twos.
As might be expected from a more childlike character, the SelfPreservation Two is more fearful, less trusting, and more ambivalent about
connections with others. Although these Twos may not be aware of how
fearful they are—all Twos repress feelings—they may have a more
pronounced need than other Twos to protect themselves in the presence of
others, which might be perceived by some as an invisible “wall.” The
ambivalence about connection experienced by this type takes the form of
mixed or conflicting feelings about establishing close connections with
others, especially important or intimate others.
Like other Twos, Self-Preservation Twos focus on meeting others’ needs
as a way of gaining love, but they also feel a strong opposing pull to hide or
withdraw in light of the threat of disapproval and rejection inherent in
interacting with others. On the one hand, people and relationships feel
compelling and important, but on the other hand, being close to people
seems fraught with danger because it includes the possibilities of losing
oneself or being judged, taken advantage of, humiliated, or rejected.
In this “youthful” Two, self-importance, irresponsibility, humor,
playfulness, and charm are in the foreground. Until they engage in selfawareness work, this Two can be easily hurt and is hypersensitive to slights
or anything that might sound like criticism or disapproval. They may have
tantrums or sulk or withdraw when upset. Feeling hurt can result in pouting,
angry recriminations, or childish accusations. They may manipulate through

an expression of feeling instead of stepping up and saying what they want
or what they dislike.
Dependency is prominent in this subtype, but mostly unconscious. These
Twos, like other Twos, don’t want to see themselves as needy or dependent
on others, and yet they can engage in a pattern of remaining unconsciously
dependent, wanting someone to take care of them, or engineering situations
in which people end up taking care of them. Because of this childlike stance
of (unconscious) dependency, the Self-Preservation Two has less freedom; a
child, after all, is rarely, if ever, completely free. So these Twos often yearn
to be free while at the same time yoking themselves to people in unhealthy
or unconscious ways.
Although, like other Twos, Self-Preservation Twos can be very
competent, on a deeper level they don’t want to have to take responsibility
for themselves. The thought of taking charge of themselves fills them with
anxiety. They can wonder: “What am I to do with myself?” They have an
underlying desire to be a child who will be excused for their ignorance,
innocence, and the feelings they might express on a whim or “just because.”
In more mature Self-Preservation Twos, however, their need for structure
can make them more methodical and more organized than other Twos.
Self-Preservation Twos can be self-indulgent and hedonistic. They are
drawn to cultivate a sense of “euphoria” through parties, shopping,
drinking, or indulging in food and fun—anything to distract themselves
from having to contact themselves. They are sensation-seeking, and they
look for pleasurable experiences to distract themselves from feelings of
self-abandonment and inner deprivation.
This Two fantasizes a lot (about being loved or admired) and idealizes
people, especially in the early stages of relationships. They unconsciously
project their power onto others whom they see as all-good as a way of not
having to be “good enough” or responsible themselves, which can make it
hard for them to own their own power or have equal and truly contactful
relationships.
The Self-Preservation Two can look like a Self-Preservation Six in that
they are fearful and ambivalent about relationships, but in the Six the
emphasis is on a more generalized fear, while this Two’s fear mainly
manifests in relationships. This Two can also resemble a Type Four in that
they express more emotionality and a longing for love, but they repress
their needs and feelings and focus on others more than Fours do.

Ben, a Self-Preservation Two, speaks:
Since I was young, I’ve always considered myself to be the central
focus of interactions with others. Being good and cute, I expected
other people to pay attention to me and felt I deserved their
support. I often took recognition for granted. I avoided long-term
decisions, commitments, and grown-up actions such as “settling
down” or striving for healthy adult relationships. Thus, I
unconsciously put off achieving independence by not truly dealing
with the consequences and costs of things. Becoming an adult in
an adult’s world, facing life’s challenges, taking full responsibility
for myself on my own, and even having a more mature look
appropriate to my age felt extremely difficult. For many years, the
thought of doing all these things made me feel as if I would lose
my biggest advantages in life: my charm and youthful likability.

The Social Two: “Ambition”
The Social Two is a seducer of environments—someone who is good in
front of groups; a more adult, leader type. In contrast to the other Two
subtypes, the Social Two appears as a powerful or intellectual person. This
Two has a passion for power, and their pride is expressed through having
influence and advantages and cultivating an image of being an influential
person.
This Two is the most obviously proud subtype because they are
ambitious, know the right people, do important things, occupy positions of
leadership, and are usually admired for their accomplishments. In the Social
Two, the passion of pride manifests itself as a sense of satisfaction in the
conquest of an audience.
In contrast to the more childlike Self-Preservation Two and the more
overtly seductive Sexual Two, the Social Two is a more adult “Power Two,”
the person who owns their own company, or works at a high level in an
organization, or is a leader in their field.
The most intellectual of the Twos, the Social Two needs to be someone
important to feed their pride—and to be important, you must use your mind
more. Seduction operates in this case through the Social Two’s ability to

influence the larger group by being impressive, exceptional, and
knowledgeable.
The Social Two’s name, “Ambition,” refers to this person’s passion for
being “on top,” being “in the know,” being close to people who are
perceived as powerful, and for wielding power themselves. The Social Two
has a passion for superiority—a passion to stand above. Because of their
need for admiration, Social Twos are competitive and may at times be
indifferent to, insensitive to, or in denial about the emotions of others. They
tend to (unconsciously) believe that everyone wants to be like them, or that
people are less able than they are, or that people are out to get them because
they envy their superior skills.
Social Twos are skillful at working behind the scenes to extend their
influence within the group and to help the larger entity move in directions
that benefit them. They know how to orchestrate individuals within the
group or community through the use of strategic giving as a way of gaining
allegiance and respect. Although it often operates at a subconscious level,
this Two has the strongest reliance on “giving to get” as a strategy in
interacting with others. The Social Two almost always has a strategic angle
when expressing generosity. They support others as a way of ensuring
loyalty and reciprocal relationships. They think in terms of influencing the
people around them through the offer or delivery of favors, and they make
things happen through the promise of rewards or positive attention.
This Two can be a bit more introverted than the other Twos. They are
more attuned to the effective cultivation of a public image that conveys
power and authority; this makes them good performers in front of an
audience, but it also necessitates a greater level of privacy or removal when
they are offstage.
Social Twos can also be workaholics, with a tendency toward
omnipotence. They may appear enthusiastic, confident or overconfident—
and even manic at times. They tend to engage in power struggles, wanting
to dominate and play the protector, and they may express a sense of
territoriality at times. They usually have a highly positive sense of their
work and their goals as well—they believe that they can accomplish
anything.
People with this subtype tend to deny vulnerable emotions, such as
shame, fear, despair, mistrust, jealousy, and envy. They may sincerely
believe they are displaying vulnerability when they aren’t, or they may use

a show of vulnerability for effect with an audience. On the low side, when
they are more unconscious and unhealthy, Social Twos may be indifferent
toward or contemptuous of others. They may take a position of power and
control over others in ways they don’t see, and may even unconsciously
exploit others, even while believing they are helping them.
The Social Two can resemble a Three or an Eight. Like Type Threes,
Social Twos tend to be goal-oriented, competitive, and successful in their
work. They typically get a lot done and have a reputation as powerful
people who can lead the group. However, Twos usually have a softer
presence and can show more vulnerability, warmth, or emotion on the way
to achieving their goals, especially if such demonstrations support their
larger aims, whereas Threes tend not to express vulnerable feelings as
much. Like Type Eights, Social Twos can be powerful, influential,
protective of others, and oriented to the big picture. Unlike Eights, however,
Social Twos can display vulnerability more (or use a show of vulnerability
to their advantage), and can more readily access their emotions in
supporting others or establishing control.
Carol, a Social Two, speaks:
I was that kid in school that was friends with the teacher. I always
got asked to take the lead on school events and student body
activities. I was like the school diplomat. I was also involved in
adult organizations, volunteering my time at non-profits or
serving on a board of directors as the youngest member.
I go above and beyond in my jobs, working hard and diligently. I
seek out influential leaders and get to know them. I don’t do this
consciously; it just happens. On my first day of work at my
current job, I sought out employee network groups and
immediately joined two. After the first meeting of each group, I
was asked to take a leading role, which I accepted gladly. I tend
to overcommit and then get stressed out. But if I am not involved
socially with groups I feel are important, I can get easily bored
and even depressed. I need to be involved and making a
difference.
After a lot of self-work and reflection, I realize my unconscious
drive to lead and influence leaders reflects my underlying need

for approval. Many times, it gets in the way of my taking care of
myself or tuning into my own feelings. I am slowly getting better
at having downtime where I can create, take a walk, or relax, but
this still requires conscious effort.

The Sexual Two: “Aggressive/Seductive”
The Sexual Two is a seducer of particular individuals. Classical seduction is
the main approach of this Two, who expresses a driving need to seduce
other people as a way of getting their needs met. This seduction—a way of
gaining allegiance or inflaming the desire of the other—occurs through the
cultivation of an attractive presentation and the expression of feeling.
While the Self-Preservation Two is the countertype of Two, with
conflicting impulses toward and away from people, and the Social Two is a
more adult Two oriented to power and control, the Sexual Two is a
generous, flexible, somewhat wild, action-oriented Two who is not afraid to
woo others by using sexuality as a weapon of conquest. The Social Two
tries to be important to feed their pride; the Sexual Two, in contrast, feeds
their pride through having somebody’s passionate attachment. Where
intelligence or strategic skill helps the Social Two reach the goal of
seducing the group, sexuality and charm is the stronghold of the Sexual
Two in seducing specific people.
The Sexual Two displays the clearest tendencies toward seduction in the
classic sense, using charm and sexuality as a way to lure in unsuspecting
potential suppliers of love, favors, and other gifts. Sexual Twos transform
their need for love into false needs, whims, and a sense of entitlement to do
what they please when they please, not asking but taking. The purpose
behind the Sexual Two’s seduction is that it is a way to solve any problem
or meet any need in life: this Two solves the dilemma of having needs but
not wanting to express them by having a strong bond with somebody who
will give them anything they want.
Sexual Twos have a need to be desired that fuels the need to seduce.
Pride activates their impulse to inspire attraction in others so that they will
give the Two whatever they want, though this Two’s pride may not be so
obvious if it is satisfied by “the loved one.” Similar to the Sexual Four, the
Sexual Two’s strategy entails being very attractive and somewhat less
ashamed of having needs. This pattern reflects a prideful sense that others

will want to meet their needs because they are so appealing, charming, and
generous.
This Two resembles the French expression of the femme fatale (or its male
equivalent) archetype in that there is a kind of “dangerous irresistibility” to
this personality. In a similar way, the “Aggressive/Seductive” title given to
this subtype suggests an association with the archetype of a vampire. This
Two is irresistible: somebody who is beautiful, but who possesses a
dangerous kind of beauty. It’s a beauty that needs to wield power over you
and could end up consuming you. The name Aggressive/Seductive also
suggests the forward momentum this subtype displays in moving toward
others—an active, purposeful attitude that can include an element of
aggression.
The Sexual Two can be direct and even dramatic in the execution of a
classical seduction: the capturing of another person’s affection and devotion
involves an intense, targeted, and passionate effort on the part of the
naturally sexy Sexual Two. And this Two aims to secure a relationship
through this seduction in which they express devotion and generosity in
exchange for whatever it is they want. Because the underlying motive of the
aggressively seductive strategy is to get needs met—to basically get a blank
check—it can be hard for these Twos to accept limits or to take “no” for an
answer.
In this way, the Sexual Two’s deeper need for love and need to seduce
manifests in a character who uses beauty, charm, and promises of affection
to attract a partner who will make them feel desirable and meet all their
needs. This Two may need attention or money or pampering, but whatever
it is, the strategy to obtain it centers around classical seduction designed to
create a special connection through which the Two can have their needs and
desires satisfied.
Sexual Twos justify their actions, words, madness, wildness,
invasiveness, and selfishness in the name of love, as if love were the only
emotion, the center of life, the experience that justifies everything. For
people with this subtype, love may be conflated with liking or with being
desired. For them, “love” is about enchanting, seducing, and attracting—
about maneuvering themselves into a position in which they occupy a
special place. Inspiring passion in someone else is their way to fix
everything in life. In line with this, they may have a self-image of the “ideal
lover.”

Naranjo has suggested that in the “highly emotional and romantic [Two]
character, ‘help’ translates as ‘emotional support,’ and on the whole, the
personality is better evoked through ‘lover’ than ‘helper.’”16 We can see
this especially in the Sexual Two: the personality might better be captured
in the archetype of the “lover” than the names that are often ascribed to
Twos: “helper” or “giver.”
While the other Two subtypes can be look-alikes to other types, the
Sexual Two may be the most recognizable as a Two and is in some ways the
“classic” Two described in many Enneagram books. That said, the Sexual
Two may be confused with the Sexual Four or the Sexual Three. For
instance, Scarlett O’Hara, the heroine of Gone With the Wind, has sometimes
been characterized as a Three or a Four, but Naranjo describes her as a good
example of the Sexual Two personality. He points out that in the pursuit of
her love object, Ashley, “exploitiveness and selfishness are scarcely hidden
under the mask of false love”17 and that she demonstrates this Two’s sense
that “desires are more important than principles.”18
The energy of this Two can be seen as “double Two” in that this person
moves toward others with the combined force of both the Two “up and out”
energy and the Sexual, fusion-oriented, instinctual energy, which amplifies
their momentum. In relationships, this Two may communicate both a sense
of excitement and the intent of a hunter closing in on its prey. Passionate,
seductive, and generous, Sexual Twos typically put a great deal of energy
into making relationships happen, and can have a very difficult time letting
go if a relationship doesn’t work out.
Teri, a Sexual Two, speaks:
I always found it easy to flirt. I enjoyed meeting new people, but
especially men! If I wasn’t flirting for myself I would flirt for my
girlfriends. They would be shocked at how easily I could go up to
an attractive man and start a conversation. I used my smile and
eyes and humor to grab their attention, and could tell when I had
won someone’s interest. It was my drug. I would get such a rush
from that attention—but if it lasted for too long, I would either get
scared or bored and want to be off to the next conquest. I also had
this need to please the person I was talking with, so much so that
I would not even stop to notice what I really believed, but would

just naturally agree, wanting them to like me and to avoid any
conflict. It took many years and an anxiety disorder for me to
understand that need for attention, that need to be liked at all
costs. At this point, I still love the connections I make with people,
but they feel genuine now, not for show or to meet some
dysfunctional need.

“The Work” for Type Two:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, THE PATH OUT OF THE TWO TRAP of abandoning yourself to gain
approval consists in having compassion for the part of you that needs to be
loved, getting to know your “real self,” and learning to love who you really
are. When Twos learn to risk being themselves and open up to being loved
for who they are (as opposed to the false images they create to get
approval), they realize the freedom of being themselves unapologetically
and not having to conform to the needs and preferences of others.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Twos this process involves observing the ways in which
they disown their needs, shape-shift to align with others, inflate their selfimage to be all things to all people, and repress their real feelings to get the
love they want. It is particularly important to explore the reasons behind
extreme efforts to gain approval, surface and allow repressed feelings, and
actively work to be conscious of your own needs and affirm the value of
who you really are.
In this section I offer some ideas about what Twos can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-Identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and adequate distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and

doing in your everyday life. As Twos take note of their habitual patterns,
they might look out for the following key patterns:
Denying needs and repressing feelings as a way to connect more easily with others

It can be hard to “observe” something that isn’t there, but it is important for
Twos to see how they avoid registering their own needs and feelings. This
means noticing when you don’t know what you are feeling or needing and
keeping an eye out for what happens when repressed feelings and needs do
arise. Rising anger or hurt feelings can be important clues that you have
been repressing needs and unconsciously expecting others to meet them
anyway.
Observe what happens when someone asks, “What do you need?” or
“What are you feeling?” and ask this of yourself regularly. Often, Twos
experience a sense of blankness or a void inside when faced with these
questions. Pay attention to this kind of “void” or absence with the intention
of discovering over time what you feel and need. Another good question to
help “locate” your “self” is, “Where are you now?”19
Adapting, merging, helping, pleasing, and shape-shifting to engineer connections with specific
individuals

Notice when you start to help or flatter people compulsively even though
you don’t want to or it exhausts you. Look out for ways you rationalize
pleasing others even if it means doing something you’d rather not do.
Observe the tendency to merge with or take on the feelings and preferences
of others while downplaying or talking yourself out of your own
experiences. Are you avoiding expressing a different opinion from someone
you’d like to connect with? Does it bother you excessively if someone
criticizes you or gets angry at you? Is it hard for you to stop thinking about
your perceived mistakes in interactions with others?
Avoiding rejection and separation through maintaining an idealized (inflated) image of yourself,
avoiding conflicts and boundaries, and managing your self-presentation (including lying and being
inauthentic)

Observing these tendencies will include noticing when you say “yes” but
want to say “no”; when you tell little white lies to maintain your image; and
when you create a false impression of who you are to engender a

connection. Look out for ways you rationalize making promises you’d
rather not keep or presenting yourself to others in false ways designed to
evoke their approval. If any of these things are happening, work to surface
any underground assumptions you are making, such as the idea that creating
an appropriate boundary will automatically lead to catastrophic rejection,
separation, or disapproval.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
your Self-Knowledge
As Twos observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to allow you to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with
more entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses
can be a first step to eventually being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Twos can ask themselves, and some
possible answers they might explore to get more insight into the sources,
operation, and consequences of these patterns.
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help me cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns, Twos have
the opportunity to see how they deny, abandon, and limit their “real self” by
presenting a false image to gain approval. If Twos can explore the reasons
they may have needed to align with others and disown their needs to cope
early on, they can have compassion for their young self who believed it had
to conform to others to survive. Twos often had a history in which they had
to take care of someone else so that that person would take care of them. By
understanding how they coped with a world that didn’t meet their needs by
giving up their needs, Twos can take a step toward reclaiming their ability
to accept and ask for what they need. When Twos can see how giving and
helping and repressing feelings all operated as strategies for coping in an
environment that didn’t fulfill their emotional needs, they can begin to see
more clearly how these strategies still operate in self-limiting ways.

What painful emotions are the Type Two patterns designed to protect me from?

Twos’ reliance on seduction comes out of a strong love need coupled with a
fear of rejection. Both feeling unlovable and being rejected can be
extremely painful feelings for Twos. Repressing needs and feelings while
seeking approval from others can help Twos avoid the sadness of not being
seen and accepted for who they really are.
Twos’ defensive patterns shield them from experiencing their fear of not
being adequately loved and taken care of, and of being rejected for not
being good enough. Image management in the service of relationship
maintenance also helps Twos avoid their own pain and anger at not getting
what they need from others. Repressing anger helps Twos feel safe, because
it reassures them that they won’t destroy or damage the connections with
others that they need to sustain themselves.
If Twos can see how their (natural) need for love hasn’t been fulfilled,
and understand the ways in which their defensive (seductive) patterns
constitute a strategy for seeking love through approval while avoiding the
pain of rejection, they can begin to see how this coping strategy reflects
deep unmet needs. If they can accept their needs and feelings they can start
to find more direct and effective ways to find the love they want.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type Two patterns operate in me now?

Understanding why and how defensive patterns operate in the present
moment is the most powerful way to begin to challenge and intercept them,
and eventually let them go. By seeing that self-inflation is a way to
maintain power and comfort in relationships, Twos can be more conscious
about managing their tendency to merge with others and promise more than
they want to deliver. By catching themselves in the act of saying “yes”
when they want to say “no,” or agreeing with others when they actually
disagree, or offering help when they would rather not, Twos activate the
awareness and self-confidence that will eventually allow them to say what
they really think. Noticing why and how you are self-conscious and worried
about what others think paves the way to becoming free of the self-denial
entailed in altering to please others.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Twos keep themselves from seeing?

Twos may avoid owning how fearful they are of close relationships—they
may simultaneously seduce others to engineer a positive-feeling connection
and distance themselves from those same others to protect themselves from
rejection. Anger at needs not being met may be a blind spot for Twos until it
gets so intense that it can’t be contained by the desire to make a good
impression. Inflation and self-aggrandizement in the service of having
power over others may hide insecurity and low self-esteem. Shape-shifting
to please and align with others leads to deep confusion for Twos about
“who they really are” and a blind spot where their “true self” might be.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

Achieving deep connections and receiving real love is only possible when
you are living from your “real self.” This is an important contradiction that
Twos avoid seeing when they are fixated in their Two patterns: seducing to
get love ultimately doesn’t work if you have to become someone you aren’t
to get it, because then you can’t be “home” to receive it when it does come
your way. Twos often satisfy themselves with approval when what they
really want is love. And the more Twos seduce by seeming to have more to
offer than is the case, they more they set themselves up for failure.
When Twos begin to self-reflect, they may find themselves in a difficult
predicament: what they both want and fear most is love and relationship.
Twos ultimately want to be seen and loved for who they are, yet they are
afraid to be that person around others. They fear that if they allow
themselves to need, ask for, and show up to get the love they want, they will
be disappointed or rejected. But to have the chance to fulfill their deepest
needs, they must take the risk to open themselves up to both satisfaction
and the pain of rejection.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with a typebased knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious
effort into everything we do—to begin to actively think, feel, and act with
more choice and awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Twos
about “what to do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and explored
their sources, operation, and consequences.

This last section is divided into three parts, each corresponding to one of
three distinct growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1)
“what to do” to actively counter the automatic patterns described above in
the “self-observation” section, 2) how to use the Enneagram’s Inner Flow
arrow lines as a map for growth, and 3) how you can study your passion (or
“Vice”) and consciously seek to embody its opposite, the antidote, the
higher “Virtue” of the type.

The Three Main Type Two Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Denying needs and repressing feelings as a way to connect more
easily with others
Inquire frequently into the presence of needs and feelings. Twos benefit from asking

themselves continually, “What do I really need?” and “How am I feeling?”
Unaware Twos may believe that having their feelings will automatically
mean alienating others, and they may also be afraid of feeling their painful
emotions. It can be disconcerting to ask yourself what you need or what you
are feeling and not have an answer. In light of this, Twos will need to start
getting in touch with their needs and feelings through an intentional
process; they will need to tolerate “not knowing” as a first step to
developing on ongoing awareness of their needs and emotions.
Real feelings create and enhance, rather than thwart, connections. As a Two seeking to

embark on self-work, it will help a lot if you have the support and
understanding of others. When someone welcomes your anger, it can feel
very liberating and healing. And working through emotional difficulties
with others by sharing real feelings is what makes good relationships
happen.
Learn to accept feelings and the emotional growth process. Recognize that all feelings are

valid—and not “right” or “wrong”—as a way to help you open up to feeling
more of your emotions. Create space to understand, learn about, and work
with expressing your emotions. When you first start to feel your anger more
often, you may express aggression in explosive, childish ways. Regardless

of your experience, it’s important for you to see that it’s all a normal part of
learning to own and manage your feelings and not make yourself “bad” for
their (understandable) “messiness.”

Adapting, merging, helping, pleasing, and shape-shifting to
engineer connections with specific individuals
Liberate yourself through healthy separation. This pattern can be countered by a

purposeful effort to locate and grow an ongoing awareness of a separate
sense of your “self.” This means actively making time to be alone. It’s
much easier for Twos to find themselves and develop their own center of
gravity when they are alone. Make it a practice to focus your attention
inside yourself when you are with other people. If your attention wanders
over to them and you are energetically “sitting in their lap,” bring your
attention back to yourself. Notice when you are merged with someone or
compulsively trying to achieve a connection, and consciously shift your
attention two feet behind you so that you can energetically disconnect and
locate your separate sense of “self” again.20 Recognize that merging
disguises a fear of intimacy.
Say “maybe” on the way from “yes” to “no.” Try to stop saying “yes” when you want

to say “no” by taking the intermediate step of saying “maybe”—it will buy
you time to think of a way to say “no.” Look for and dwell on your real
experience of not wanting to help. Let that be okay, and notice if it feels like
relief. Reassure yourself that others can do it without you.
Accept, but manage and contain, your emotions. Your emotions are important and valid.

Value them as expressions of your true self. But also notice when you put
pressure on others through expressions of emotion, and take the risk to call
this what it is: emotional manipulation. Instead of making yourself “bad”
for this, just recognize that it’s a part of your coping strategy and try to
work against it. Challenge yourself to own your needs and feelings, and
find ways to soothe yourself when you are courageous enough to feel your
pain.
Open up to receiving from others by living more from your real self. By noticing the

underlying assumptions you have about reciprocal giving, you can both

work against “giving to get,” and learn to give without expectations and
receive without feeling indebted. This frees you up to enjoy relationships
for their inherent value as opposed to simply viewing them as a utilitarian
route to survival.

Avoiding rejection and separation through maintaining an
idealized (inflated) image of yourself, avoiding conflicts and
boundaries, and managing your self-presentation (including lying
and being inauthentic)
Focus on the freedom that boundaries provide. Spending time alone can help Twos

realize that separation isn’t so bad. Being alone doesn’t have to lead to
loneliness. Recognize that boundaries actually make us freer to express
ourselves safely in relationships and allow for better and closer connections
with others. Make a conscious effort to learn how to make and maintain
good boundaries. Remember that “no” is a very good answer.
Find the sweet spot between inflation and deflation. Notice the tendency to inflate and

deflate your sense of yourself and allow yourself to feel relief at just being
who you are. Take note when you have fantasies of being the ideal partner
or friend or when you want to be all things to all people, and stop to
consider if this is really possible or desirable. Realize that it’s okay (and
actually liberating) to not be perfect or perfectly aligned with others.
Allow constructive conflict to enliven your relationships and strengthen your sense of self.

Recognize that conflict can actually bring people closer together, and that
when you express real opinions and preferences, you are honoring others by
revealing your true self. Take the risk with trusted others to tell them what
you really think, especially when you disagree or don’t want to help. Notice
if you lie to smooth out social interactions, and try to be more honest. Try
not to promise more than you can deliver, and realize that this makes your
relationships more authentic and deeper.
Face your pain in a conscious way so you can let it go. Allow yourself to feel the pain of

neglect or rejection, and realize you can survive it. Learn to weather
emotional injuries, and realize that growing a thicker skin doesn’t mean

your hurt doesn’t matter. Learn to love and accept yourself as you are and
risk opening up to receiving affection from others, knowing that if someone
doesn’t like you, it might be more about them than about you.

The Inner Flow for Type Two:
Using the Arrow Lines to Chart Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
define one of the dimensions of dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “growththrough-stress” point, and its “child-heart-security” point map one kind of
growth path described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines
suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow is the path of
higher development. The “growth-through-stress” or “growth–
stress” point ahead represents specific challenges we can
consciously navigate to break out of the limitations associated
with our core point and grow in an important new direction.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child-heart“ point indicates issues and themes that must be
consciously acknowledged and owned from childhood so that
we can move forward and not be held back by unfinished
business from the past. This “child–heart” point represents
qualities of security we unconsciously repressed, occasionally
return to in times of stress, and can now consciously own as a
way of furthering our forward progress.

Type Two Moving Forward to Type Eight: Consciously Using the
Eight “Growth–Stress” Point for Development and Expansion
Type Twos’ Inner Flow growth path brings them into direct contact with the
challenges embodied in Type Eight: owning their power and authority,
allowing for more access to anger, and handling conflict and confrontation
more consciously. Twos are typically more comfortable being the power
behind the throne, but moving to Eight invites them to initiate more and to
take the risk of leading and acting proactively rather than always reacting.
Crucially for Twos, moving to Eight also means learning to be more direct
and assertive as opposed to using indirect means to get needs met and
sugarcoating messages to make them go down easier.
While it can be difficult at first for Twos (especially Self-Preservation
Twos) to imagine themselves feeling comfortable with being authoritative,
aggressive, and direct when appropriate, incorporating healthy Type Eight
behaviors can provide a much-needed balance to Twos’ habit of getting
needs met covertly through seduction, charm, and strategic helpfulness.
Eights’ strength and self-confidence help Twos value themselves and be
more bold in the things they do. Twos see their real power in helping and
supporting others, and while this a legitimate strength, they can overdo the
strategy of emotional support and underestimate the power of exercising
authority in more direct ways. Focusing on embodying more of the Eight
Point expands the range of ways Twos can make an impact on others, and it
allows for more freedom in how they interact with others. Seeing conflict as
a good thing—as a way of having positive contact through the exploration

of legitimate differences—can also counter their tendency to merge
emotionally with others.

Type Two Moving Back to Type Four: Consciously Using the
“Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early Issues and Find
Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Twos calls for them to reclaim their needs and
feelings as represented by the Four Point. Many Twos received the message
early on that their needs and emotions were too much. In keeping with the
coping strategy of adapting emotionally to others, Twos typically respond to
this by repressing their emotions and disowning their needs as a way of
maintaining connections. By consciously drawing on the strengths of Type
Fours, Twos can expand their access to their authentic emotions, reclaim a
healthy ability to self-reference (to balance out their disproportionate focus
on others), and accept and express their needs with more confidence.
If Twos have been made to feel shame for their needs and feelings, as
many have been, it can be important and healing for them to incorporate the
Four stance that feelings are important and valuable expressions of your
authentic self. By encouraging a shift of focus from others to self, the Two
“move to Four” allows Twos to ground themselves in the legitimacy of their
real feelings and needs, thereby strengthening their connection to their own
inner knowing and their sense of self. Twos often experience an underlying
sense of anxiety related to deep beliefs from childhood that their normal
needs and feelings threaten their connections with the important people in
their lives. The Two move to Four can help Twos relax in the knowledge
that honoring their emotions and desires can support, rather than thwart or
threaten, their ability to form positive relationships.
Navigated consciously, Twos can use the higher wisdom of the Four
Point to establish a healthy balance between focusing on the self and
focusing on others; between expressing sadness and hurt and a cultivating a
sense of lightness; and between meeting others’ needs and asking for what
they need. They can consciously remind themselves that although it is often
important to make room to empathize with others’ emotions, all their own
feelings are valid and valuable as well.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Pride and Aiming for Humility
The developmental path from Vice to Virtue is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
Two, the Vice (or passion) of the type is pride, and its opposite, the Virtue,
is humility. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to Virtue
conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion functions
within our personality and the more we consciously work toward the
embodiment of its opposite, the more we can free ourselves from the
unconscious habits and fixated patterns of our type and evolve toward our
“higher” side.
The work of Type Two centers on becoming more and more conscious of
how different forms of the passion of pride play a role in shaping the focus
of attention and patterns of their personality. Twos can do this work by
regularly asking if pride is playing a role in what they are thinking, feeling,
and doing. As Twos become more familiar with their experience of pride,
they can go even further by making conscious efforts to focus on enacting
their Virtue, the “antidote” to the passion of pride. In the case of Type Two,
the Virtue of humility represents a state of being that Twos can attain
through consciously manifesting their higher potential.
Humility is a way of being that is free of the attachment to be better than
you really are in order to know that you have value. Humility allows you to
rest in the knowledge that you are ‘”good enough” as you are—that you
don’t need to be perfect or superior or recognized in a specific way to be
worthy of love. Humility means learning to love and accept yourself for
exactly who you are, no more and no less. When Twos can transcend the
prideful need to see themselves as somehow better than they are—as
indispensable, without needs, able to turn themselves into whatever others
desire most—they can relax into the freedom that humility brings: to just be
yourself, knowing that is good enough.
Internally, false pride can easily be confused with self-confidence. This
can be problematic for Twos seeking to become aware of pride and at the
same time allow for a real experience of their own goodness (as opposed to
pride). After all, it’s the early experience of “not being good enough” or
“being too much” that initiates pride as a survival strategy in the first place.
Twos’ tendency toward self-aggrandizement and self-inflation motivates

them to take on too much, thinking they have no needs or limits like other
people. But this pattern inevitably leads to deflation, self-criticism, and a
painful sense of lack when Twos don’t deliver on their idealized view of
themselves and can’t be all things to all people.
To avoid the ups of self-inflation and the associated downs of selfcriticism, it can be important for Twos to consciously cultivate a strong
sense of humility—an ability to own their strengths, their good intentions,
and the positive things they do, but also an awareness of how they can puff
themselves up under times of stress or when trying to impress others.
Aiming for humility as a growth path means observing the ups and downs,
the inflation and deflation, and aiming for the middle, for the truth of who
you are—developing your true strengths while also acknowledging your
limitations.
The virtue of humility also plays an important role in the larger journey
we all must take if we aspire to grow toward our true (or oak tree) Selves.
Humility is required for us to be able to let go of our ego needs, suffer our
fears and pains, and realize that the personality structure that makes us
comfortable also limits our development. In this way, humility represents
the quality we all must seek to embody to successfully dis-identify from the
personality, such that we can see beyond the narrow view of the false self,
that (mistakenly) believes itself to be all that we are and thus wants to stay
in charge and in control.
Noticing pride and practicing humility teaches Twos to value who they
are as a first step to becoming all that they can be, not through striving and
helping and giving, but through relaxing into a confident sense that they are
enough as they are.. Humility allows Twos to embrace a realistic
assessment of themselves so they may realize their full potential and relate
to others as their real self.

Specific Work for the Three Type Two Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
As Naranjo teaches, whatever type you are, the path from observing your
passion to finding the antidote to the passion is not exactly the same for
each of the subtypes. The path of conscious self-work has been
characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and grace:” the “grit”21 of our
personality programming, the “grind” of our efforts to grow, and the

“grace” that comes to us from doing our work in conscious and positive
ways. Each subtype has to “grind against” something slightly different.
travel the path from pride to humility by making
dependency needs more conscious, observing and working with fear and
ambivalence in relationships, and noting how pride and mistrust keep
defenses up and prevent real engagement and intimacy. Most of all, learning
to be more resilient in the face of emotional hurts, as well as gently
encouraging themselves to find ways to grow up and own their power, helps
these Twos. Playing small doesn’t work in adulthood, and you have just as
much ability as anyone else to take charge of your life and be your own
authority. Work to receive from others from a position of strength and
competence as opposed to a pose of self-inflation or underlying need.
Recognize that by holding on to your own value you invite others to give to
you freely, based on an appreciation of your true worth, without
manipulation or unconscious dependence. Remember: when you can
support yourself from the inside rather than relying on others, you have the
ability to both receive love from others and weather the occasional pain of
rejection.
Self-Preservation Twos

Social Twos travel the path from pride to humility by recognizing and owning

how the need for power and admiration plays a role in the things they do;
by becoming more aware of the strategic intent of their generosity; and by
allowing for more real vulnerability and authenticity in relationships with
others. These Twos benefit from seeing how their form of leadership may
be unconsciously manipulative and working against a deeper need to see
themselves as more competent than others. It is also important for Social
Twos to make active efforts to receive as much as they give and to relax the
manic tendency to work too hard. These Twos may experience a sense of
omnipotence as a compensation for giving up their deeper needs for love
and care. Slowing down and making sure their needs are getting met in
direct ways can help them observe and work against their pride-fueled
impulse to overwork. Remembering to focus on needs and vulnerable
feelings serves to temper the important work these Twos do with a
conscious sense of humility.

Sexual Twos can travel the path from pride to humility by actively developing

aspects of their real selves; by finding varied ways to meet their needs; and
by more consciously managing their energetic connections with others. By
focusing on receiving and giving with presence and awareness, containing
their seductive energy, and maintaining good boundaries, they can temper
their pride with a more humble sense of their own intentions and impact on
other people. These Twos can also aim for humility by being honest with
themselves about their true intentions in relationships, noting when they
manipulate or misrepresent themselves in the service of seduction, and
taking the risk to be who they are as opposed to presenting themselves as
the ideal love object. If you are a Sexual Two, be honest with yourself about
whether or not you are basing your self-image on who you think you need
to be to be loved or desired. Try to risk being yourself and allowing others
to come to you.

Conclusion
THE TWO POINT REPRESENTS THE ENERGY of pride that fuels a need to seduce
others into providing emotional support by being something “more.” It also
represents the ways in which we all inflate our sense of who we are to
bolster our self-worth in a world that seems to reject us. The Two path of
growth can show us how to transform false pride into the energy that will
help us manifest our humble belief in the worthiness of who we really are
without needing to help, please, or attract. In each of the Type Two subtypes
we see a specific character who teaches us what is possible when we turn
the survival strategy of self-aggrandizement into a peaceful acceptance of
our inherent value and power through the alchemy of self-observation, selfdevelopment, and self-knowledge.

CHAPTER 11

The Point One Archetype:
The Type, Subtypes, and Growth Path
Probably my worst quality is that I get very passionate about
what I think is right.
—Hillary Clinton

Freedom is not worth having if it does not include the
freedom to make mistakes.
—Mahatma Gandhi

TYPE ONE REPRESENTS THE ARCHETYPE of the person who seeks to be good
and do “the right thing” to satisfy an urgent need to be virtuous and
responsible and to avoid fault and blame. This drive provides a defensive
protection in a world that demands and rewards good behavior and punishes
bad behavior.
This archetype also exists as the “superego,” that part of the psyche that
stands in for the parental voice of authority. This internal force exercises its
power to tame the excesses born of raw impulses, animal instinct, and
unrestricted forms of self-interested self-expression.
Type Ones are thus the prototype for that part in all of us that strives to
match high standards of good behavior as a way of proving ourselves
worthy and avoiding blame or fault. This archetypal stance prioritizes
following the rules as a way of bringing about a perceived higher good
through invoking a higher order.
This effort also necessarily involves stifling or “civilizing” natural
impulses, instincts, and feelings that would lead us to break the rules to our
advantage. Type Ones are vigilant not to let these forces get out of control.
Ones tend to inhibit their experience of the wisdom of the “animal within”
and the natural rhythms of spontaneity, instinctive expression, and play.
Rigidity, criticism, and continuous judgment are as characteristic of this
archetypal character as their belief in justice, fairness, and good order.

Type One individuals are reliable, responsible, honest, well-intentioned,
conscientious, and hardworking. They sincerely want to improve
themselves and the world around them. Their specific “superpower” can be
seen in their high integrity and the passion and dedication they bring to the
fulfillment of their ideals and the pursuit of high standards. They have welldeveloped powers of criticism and an intuitive sense of the perfection of
nature and the natural order of things. They are diligent, practical, and
thrifty. They can be discerning and objective, meaning that they excel at
analyzing situations and clarifying issues while separating out any emotions
that may be involved.
As with all the archetypal personalities, however, Type Ones’ gifts and
strengths also represent their “fatal flaw” or “Achilles heel:” they get in
their own way by overdoing their focus on virtue and thus undermine their
own self-confidence, balance, and inner peace through over-control, selfrepression, and excessive judgment. However, when they can learn to tame
their sometimes harsh criticality and take things less seriously, they can call
on their gifts of discernment, reliability, and idealism to make the world a
better place.
The Type One Archetype in Homer’s Odyssey:
The Phaeacians of Scheria
After encountering characters posing obstacles and threats along
the way, Odysseus confronts the Phaeacians of Scheria, who are
disciplined and proper, orderly, and conventional. They are
courteous, concerned with etiquette, duty, and doing the right
thing. Their king’s castle is architecturally perfect, surrounded by
bronze walls. They are expert sailors and are always careful to
stay precisely on course.1 Eventually they come to feel morally
obligated to help Odysseus get back to Ithaca.
As virtuous as the Phaeacians are, even these “ideal” qualities
have a downside. Anything taken to its extreme becomes a
problem, including making moral judgments. Homer tells us that
some find them to be “bloodless do-gooders,” and that their
perfectionism can be heavy and hectoring rather than graceful and
helpful.2

The Phaeacians embody the Type One personality in striving to
be paragons of virtue—but also as being rigid, self-righteous, and
judgmental toward those who are not.
Trying to be perfect is not enough to protect the Phaeacians from
the whims of fate, however. Poseidon resents their vessel’s almost
superhuman speed and the gifts they leave with Odysseus. He
turns the Phaeacians’ ship to stone just as it returns to the harbor
and he prepares to raise a mountain around Scheria’s port. The
Phaeacians realize Poseidon’s fury, and they rush desperately to
begin a great sacrifice. We last see them in pious prayer and
ritual, hoping only to appease the anger of a powerful god.

The Type One Personality Structure
LOCATED AT THE TOP-RIGHT CORNER of the Enneagram, Type One belongs to
the “body-based” triad associated with the core emotion of anger and a focus
of attention related to order, structure, and control.
Although Type One is a body type, the focus on judgment and standards
can make Ones seem more head focused, energetically. This trait reflects
the constant internal dynamic in which the mental function assesses,
regulates, and often actively stops “wrong” impulses originating in the
body.

Naranjo notes that, fundamentally, the One is an over-civilized or overcontrolled type. Typically, when Ones experience an impulse—to run, to
express anger, to embrace someone—it moves up from the gut and through
the body before being intercepted and judged by a well-developed critical

function in the mind. If the impulse fails the inspection, the One’s critical
thinking function labels the impulse “wrong” and represses it.
Most often, this repression is routine. A frown may cross the One’s face.
A passing comment (maybe self-effacing) might deflect the moment. But if
the impulse is “unacceptable” at a deeper moral level, it can trigger
“reaction formation,” a defense mechanism in which the One pushes the
original impulse down hard into the unconscious through automatic
generation and expression of the opposite impulse.
With each “wrong” impulse, the One’s fixation with being correct and
avoiding fault is in conflict with a natural and spontaneous impulse,
instinct, or feeling. This conflict is frustrating, and the critical function that
maintains it is relentless. This simmering anger then easily becomes
resentment when confronted with “rule-breaking” or self-indulgent
behavior. The One’s perception that being a resentful person is itself
“wrong” or “bad” encloses the personality in a cycle of judgment and anger,
of reaction and often, regret.

The Early Coping Strategy: Type One
Type One personalities defend against criticism, real or threatened, and
shame or punishment for being “wrong” or “bad.” Ones often report that
they experienced pressure early in life to do something well or correct at a
time when they were too young to take on the burden of this responsibility.
The experience of criticism from parental figures or others creates an
anxious sense in the young One that there is a “right way” to do things.
Doing the “right” thing and striving for faultless performance inspires
supportive feedback and positive feelings.
Some Ones experienced this early responsibility because they lacked
structural support (or psychological “holding”) in their childhood
environment. Chaos or uncertainty or anxiety in the family motivates the
One child to take on the task of providing order and structure for himself
and often others in the family. The coping strategy of adhering strongly to
sound rules, routines, and standards of behavior provides the One with inner
cohesion and security, as well as protection from criticism. If Ones can
manage to put things in just the right order, they can actually relax
somewhat and experience a sense of well-being.
On the other hand, criticism and anxiety coming from things not being in
the right order quickly teaches the One child the dangers of following

spontaneous impulses. The child learns that doing the “wrong” thing or not
making a good enough effort is—and should be—something that invites
negative feedback and painful feelings.
Naranjo explains that the Type One personality structure grows out of
this early burden of responsibility coupled with little acknowledgment of
the One child’s essential goodness.3 Natural frustration builds when a child
has to exercise a high degree of self-control at too early an age. The One
child denies this frustration through overcompensating in the other
direction. She unconsciously turns away from the anger and frustration,
displacing the energy of this emotion into efforts to be excessively good.
Ones also internalize a “parental” voice that functions thereafter as an
internal critic or coach. This coping strategy of proactively criticizing
oneself and trying to do things correctly prior to coming under parental
scrutiny can avoid outside criticism and punishment. This guidance system
keeps the One on track according to specific standards of ideal behavior in
an ongoing way. But the internal critic that originally formed to protect the
Type One becomes an ever-present voice or sense, detecting fault and
imperfection in oneself and the outside world.
Derek, a Self-Preservation One, describes his childhood situation
and the development of his coping strategy:
He was the oldest of three boys. His father was a military officer
Type Eight who flew airplanes in Vietnam. His mother was a Type
Nine “hippie.” His parents divorced when he was young and the
three boys went to live with their Dad. As the oldest of the three
boys, Derek was “second in command.” If something went wrong
on his watch, there was hell to pay. At his mom’s house, life was
unconventional, and Derek felt responsible for trying to create
stability—and avoid embarrassment. Derek’s strong sense of
responsibility at a very young age produced in him an anxiety and
habitual attention focused on making sure things are “going
right” and assessing how he and others are fulfilling their duties.

The Main Type One Defense Mechanism:
Reaction Formation

Reaction formation is a psychological defense through which the human
psyche turns something into its polar opposite to render it less threatening.
So, in the face of “excessive demands and frustration” early in life, instead
of feeling angry and rebelling, the One child takes on more responsibility,
becoming a very good boy or girl.4 The fundamental fixation to be good
and do the right thing motivates the Ones’ focus on “positive” feelings and
their denial or repression of their “negative” feelings. Reaction formation
serves to relieve the stress of this difficult internal conflict. Focusing on and
expressing more acceptable “good” emotions allows the Type One to push
“bad” feelings into the unconscious.
An example of reaction formation as an active defense might be the
One’s automatic tendency to be excessively nice to someone with whom
they are actually angry or dissatisfied. Or reaction formation might turn a
rising feeling of envy at another’s success into an expression of admiration
for them. Through reaction formation, any emotion can be denied
(unconsciously) by bringing forward its “bright side” opposite. Reaction
formation also functions to deny ambivalence: instead of feeling mixed
feelings, like resenting someone you feel grateful for or hating someone
you love, a One changes mental focus to allow themselves to feel only the
positive end of this complex set of emotions.5
Reaction formation helps protect the One from outside criticism by
ensuring that his or her expressions of emotion are controlled and
appropriate. Reaction formation also defends the One against feeling the
full force of internal judgment for feelings he or she feels it’s “wrong” or
“bad” to have (much less express) like “inappropriate” anger or selfish
desire.

The Type One Focus of Attention
The focus of attention on trying to make things as right as possible makes
Ones instinctively drawn to noticing “errors” or “imperfections” and then
correcting them. The mental habit of judging against an inner ideal goes
beyond just discerning right and wrong or good and bad. Through the inner
critic, a Type One habitually assesses better or worse (and why) in
everything they compare to this ideal. Whether the person instinctively
directs this impulse more inward, toward society, or into personal
relationships, the focus of attention remains on striving for flawlessness in order
to avoid criticism and pain.

Ones develop a deep appreciation for what they view as “perfect,” which
comes from what they “feel” or “know” to be correct. The Type One focus
is often frustrating, as the actual attainment of something perfect is an
impossible standard. But Ones also describe feeling a wonderful sensation
of peace and satisfaction when things do come together in the just right
way. Their focus on achieving this feeling, however rare or temporary,
motivates Ones to work hard and attend energetically to the details of
everything they value in their quest for security and well-being that
accompanies an optimal result.
It is important to note that Ones don’t all focus their attention on
faultlessness in the same way, or apply it to every aspect of their lives.
Some Ones may focus on order and cleanliness in their environment, while
others may not mind having a messy office but rather focus intently on
larger questions in the political or moral realm, like issues of right and
wrong or social justice. Some of these differences in focus naturally occur
at the instinctual level according to the emphasis on Self-Preservation,
Social relationships, or Sexual bonding.

The Type One Emotional Passion: Anger
The passion is a specific emotional motivation at the core of the Personality.
Anger is the emotional passion for Type Ones, but it operates in a particular
way. What we commonly think of as overt aggression is more prominent in
other types, such as Eights and the Sexual subtypes of Sixes and Fours.
Type Ones experience and express anger more as resentment, frustration,
self-righteousness, or irritation. Ones report that they most often feel
resentment, a kind of low-level, background, tamped down anger that things
aren’t as they should be. Anger often manifests as irritation or frustration
when it’s controlled and rationalized, manifested by someone committed to
being above reproach.
On the other hand, Ones can be fiercely angry when they feel righteous—
and therefore “appropriate”—in expressing it.
Type One’s anger has two main sources. First, it grows out of the
frustrating experience of trying hard to achieve perfection; but also, Ones
habitually recognize instances where others fail to meet—or even try to
meet—the standards they inherently feel are “right” or “correct” or
“appropriate.” This perception adds angry resentment for the “bad” conduct

of others to the One’s frustration at how difficult it is to set things right in
life.
The repressed or “sullen” form of anger is the side of the Type One
personality that most people might not notice. Far from being a violent or
disruptive personality, the One’s underlying passion of anger actually ends
up fueling an over-controlled or over-civilized character.6 A One is more
likely to appear to others as tense or critical or demanding or “committed,”
than they are to appear overtly mad or rude.

The Type One Cognitive Mistake:
“We All Can and Should Do Better”
In Chapter 1 we discussed the idea that for each of us our personality
manifests in all three of our centers of intelligence. We all get stuck in
habitual ways of thinking that influence our beliefs, feelings, and actions,
and this continues even after the mental models that create our overall
perspective aren’t accurate anymore. Naranjo describes these fixed mental
assumptions as the “cognitive mistake” or mental trance that underlies and
shapes character. While the passion shapes the personality’s emotional
motivations, the “cognitive fixation” preoccupies the personality’s thought
processes.

Type Ones typically believe that their object of attention is imperfect and
that they must try to improve it, whether they are focused on themselves,
their loved ones, or society at large. They also tend to think that it’s bad to
make mistakes and that bad behavior should be punished. These beliefs lead
to behaviors like working hard and adhering to rules and codes of ethics.
Emotionally, these beliefs and thoughts cause Ones to suffer the anxiety,
frustration, and resentment we’ve discussed.

For example, a Type One person focused on her own imperfection may
believe that she is unworthy and inadequate even when the evidence in how
she lives her life shows that she is actually successful in many ways and
more than adequate. Her cognitive mistake is that she can and should be
doing better, even though objectively she always does her best to be ethical
and diligent.
And yet these habitual ways of thinking are extremely hard to change.
They formed early in life and served a vital protective function for the
developing self. But like the acorn shell, we inhibit our growth by staying
within the confines of these habitual patterns of thought.
Here are some key beliefs and assumptions characteristic of the Type
One personality. The predominance and focus of these perspectives vary
somewhat by subtype, as we’ll see later in this chapter.

I must strive to meet high standards of behavior and
performance to avoid criticism and feelings of failure.
I am flawed and far from perfect and therefore often bad.
If I don’t actively inhibit my emotions, impulses, and needs, I
might say or do something inappropriate and bring shame on
myself.
I like to be someone people rely on to be fair and upright. If
I’m going to be proud of anything, I guess I’m proud of that.
If something goes wrong, but I did everything as correctly as I
could have, then I can’t be at fault.
Pretty much everything in the world can be improved—and
some parts definitely should be.
Perfect is hard. It should be hard. It’s rare, and it’s hard. But
it’s worth it.
If everyone did their part to follow what they know are the rules
of decent society, everything would flow much more smoothly.

These kinds of core beliefs help Ones to make well-considered sense of
the world. But the Type One’s striving for perfection while focusing so
much on flaws binds his or her understanding of “self” to this struggle to
improve an endlessly imperfect world.

The Type One Trap:
“If Not ‘Perfect,’ What Does ‘Good Enough’ Mean?”
The patterns and habits that arise out of the coping strategy of proactively
criticizing in light of specific standards of quality or perfection create a
circular “trap” that Type Ones act out consciously and unconsciously. This
“trap” reflects a basic conflict at the core of the One personality. Ones avoid
criticism and punishment by holding themselves or others to a punishingly
high standard. They then fuel this cycle with anger and resentment at
failures to meet this standard. In this way their striving to free themselves or
others from fault only reinforces Type Ones’ habitual beliefs about being
unworthy or unlovable. Thus, Ones’ efforts to prove themselves acceptable
and lovable ends up reinforcing their false belief in their imperfection and
unlovableness. Clearly, when you only love what is perfect, it’s hard to
accept—to relax in the knowledge—that “just okay” really can be good
enough for everyone.

The Key Type One Traits
Inner Critic

Most Ones will say that they have an inner critic that judges and otherwise
comments upon almost everything they do. While some of the other
personality types may experience this kind of internal critical dialogue
some of the time, Ones report experiencing this voice as much as 90 to 100
percent of their waking hours. Other types who are also inwardly critical
can decrease or even disregard this voice temporarily. But for a One, this
critical function largely dominates their internal life.
A Type One’s inner critic can sometimes develop to be more like an
internal parent than simply a harsh inner judge. According to some Ones,
the same impulse that criticizes the One for having done something poorly
might be an encouraging impulse in the next moment, as if saying, “That
was better, do that again next time.”

Over-Control

Part of Type One’s need to exercise control in their environment is so they
can influence outcomes in a “good” or “right” direction, away from a “bad”
or “wrong” one.
Ones can often be perceived by others as inflexible or rigid, which is a
natural consequence of their tendency to over-control themselves and the
things they say and do. They like the security of ritual, routine, and rules
they know can be enforced, but it can be hard for them to see when control
and adherence to rules becomes a problematic tendency to “over-control.”
Among other things, this often means that work has to come before play
and they don’t leave enough room for pleasure, fun, and relaxation.
Although Ones tend to be controlled in their expression of anger, they are
not always conscious of how angry they really are. They try to inhibit their
expression, but heightened anger, frustration, or resentment often “leaks
out” in their nonverbal behavior. The One may be completely unaware that
others can see this anger “leaking” through his or her control.
Virtuousness

Ones endeavor continually to be virtuous. Unlike other types, who have
other kinds of primary motivations and may enjoy being “bad,” Ones orient
themselves toward being good citizens and doing the right thing. Generally,
this is a well-intentioned, morally upright character. Ones truly want to be
good and do the right thing as they see it for everyone’s benefit.
In addition to a love of order, perfectionism may also be at work in
obedience to authority and altruistic efforts to do good works. In all of these
One tendencies, adherence to the guiding principles that rules and ideals
supply can be seen to be both a strategy for gaining affection through
virtuousness and a reaction formation defense against anger and frustration.
Perfectionism and Criticality

My Type One brother once made a comment that demonstrates the One’s
desire for perfection. I was cooking dinner at his house one night, and as I
began to make the pasta sauce, he peered into the pot and remarked that the
chopped onions I was sauteeing were not all the same size. This kind of
comment speaks to the concern with making things perfect or uniform.
Ones can believe that if things are not made perfect, bad things will happen;
in this case, perhaps my brother feared that imperfectly cut onions would
result in a chewy marinara.

While perfectionism or “flawlessness” can be said to be the core focus or
root strategy of the One, not all Ones relate to being perfectionists in the
same way. As we will explore as we move into talking about the subtypes, a
One’s perfectionism and criticality varies with the subtype’s instinctual
focus toward self-preservation, social relationships, or sexual bonding.

The Type One Shadow
Generally, Ones have blind spots related to the Shadow side of their efforts
to be good, do the right thing, and fulfill high ideals. Because they believe
they are always right, they can be overly critical and punishing of
themselves and others, but rationalize their harsh treatment as correct or
justified. Ones can also be highly sensitive to criticism. It can be hard for
them to hear sincere feedback from others because they are already beating
up on themselves or fearing critical messages.
The Shadow side of believing in perfection is a tendency to fall into
rigid, black-and-white thinking. Others can experience them as inflexible,
or hypercritical and see the standards they apply as unreasonable given that
perfection is often not possible or desirable.
The attachment to the inner critic as a defense against the chaos of
unrestricted impulses can lead Ones to believe in unrelenting criticism as a
necessary feature of their inner experience, rationalizing their judgments as
a needed check on imperfections, even when it drives them into depression
and anxiety. Ones thus have a blind spot about the downside of their
tendency to criticize. In particular, they often fail to see and own their
highly positive qualities. In this way, Ones demonstrate that “positive”
attributes can also be shadow elements in the personality.
Ones may have a difficult time considering the validity of someone else’s
view of things if they perceive others as being unfair, biased, or morally lax.
When taking what they see as a higher moral position in a conflict, it can be
hard for them to let go of the perception that the other person “knows” he or
she is doing something wrong and is doing it anyway. It can be difficult for
Ones to accept that there are no moral absolutes. In these respects, their
Shadow aspect is the ability to see beyond the black and white of their own
inner sense of “right” and “wrong,” or “better or worse.”
Most of all, Ones have a blind spot related to their experience and
expression of anger. In some cases, Ones don’t know (and can’t admit)
when they are angry. If there is too much pressure on a One to repress what

may be irrepressible, something has to give. Leaking occurs when Ones try
to deny, control, or hide their anger, but others see it in a clenched jaw, a
curt or abrupt way of speaking, a strained tone of voice, or a tension-filled
body.
Righteous outbursts can be one way that a One’s anger may escape
despite their intention to repress it. This happens when Ones channel their
anger into a cause or an opinion about some sort of injustice that they feel a
sense of righteous indignation about. Because this righteousness may be
about what they see as an objectively unjust situation, or it may be on
behalf of others, Ones can rationalize that they are actually being virtuous
instead of angry. On rare occasions, Ones may also “act out” their Shadow
in some form of “bad” behavior, when their efforts at virtue become too
stressful, and their deeper impulses or needs (that normally stay hidden,
even to themselves) escape their conscious control.
The Shadow of the Type One Passion:
Anger in Dante’s Underworld
In Dante’s Inferno, “the Wrathful” describes those that
succumbed to the Passion of Anger in their lives. As punishment,
the shades that went so deep into anger during their lives are now
completely taken over by this emotion—muddy people, fighting
each other, their faces scarred with rage—those that “anger
overcame” are “covered” all over with mud, having a brutal,
physical fight in the dingy swamp.
I, intent on looking as we passed, saw muddy people moving
in that marsh, all naked, with their faces scarred by rage.
They fought each other, not with hands alone, but struck with
head and chest and feet as well with teeth they tore each
other limb from limb. 7
Not all anger deserves this punishment, of course. The Pilgrim
himself angrily shouts down one foul-tempered shade that accosts
the boat: “May you weep and wail, stuck in this place forever,
you damned soul, for, filthy as you are, I recognize you!”8 Virgil
praises the Pilgrim for being indignant because the shade’s earthly
life earned him that rebuke and more.

The extreme Anger punished in the underworld and shadowing
the Type One personality is a mindset of hostility and resentment
that habitually creates constant struggle. As we see in Dante’s
underworld, that kind of rage is always its own reward.9 The
Pilgrim last sees the shadow he recognized being attacked in the
muck, so mad with anger that he turns to biting himself.

The Three Kinds of Ones:
The Type One Subtypes
IN EACH OF THE THREE TYPE ONE SUBTYPES, the passion of anger gets
channeled through different drives related to trying to make things perfect.
Ones either try to perfect themselves and the things they do (SelfPreservation), or they consider themselves to be perfect because they adhere
to “the right way to be” (Social), or they try to perfect other people (Sexual).
The three Type One subtypes represent distinct characters as each of the
three Ones manifests as a specific expression of anger. While they share the
larger Type One themes in common, each subtype further specializes in or
focuses on a different subset of the Type One concerns.
Naranjo, drawing on Ichazo, gives the three Type One subtypes
descriptive titles as a way of suggesting each of their distinct patterns of
attention. The Self-Preservation subtype has been named “Worry,” the
Social subtype is called “Non-Adaptability” or “Rigidity,” and the Sexual
subtype is “Zeal.” Naranjo notes that the Self-Preservation Ones are the true
“perfectionists”; the Social Ones are “perfect” in that they believe they
know the right way to be; and the Sexual Ones focus on “perfecting others.”
While the larger category of Type Ones is sometimes referred to as “The
Perfectionist,” this mainly applies to the Self-Preservation Ones. Sexual
Ones are more “reformers” than perfectionists.

The Self-Preservation One: “Worry”
For the Self-Preservation One, anger is most repressed. To render their own
anger less threatening, the mechanism of reaction formation transforms the
heat of anger into warmth. And this is a major shift—an angry person
disconnecting from his anger to become a gentle, supportive person with
good intentions. In this subtype, the anger of the One, together with

defenses against that anger, manifest as good intentions, perfectionism,
heroic efforts, obedience to rules, and an obsessive striving for perfection.
The outward result is an excessively gentle, decent, and kind person. In
the quest to perfect themselves, Self-Preservation Ones believe it’s bad to
be angry and so make a virtue of being tolerant, forgiving, and sweet
whenever possible. Underneath, these Ones are very angry, but they control
it. Under pressure, however, this One’s anger may leak out as irritation,
resentment, frustration, or self-righteousness.
The Self-Preservation One worries a lot. This subtype has a need for
foresight, a desire to plan everything out, and a compulsion to try to have
everything under control. Self-Preservation Ones often had a chaotic family
history where they had to provide the stability, even as young children.
These Ones were usually the most responsible person in the family. Perhaps
because their survival felt threatened by out-of-control elements in their
early environment, this subtype has a lot of anxiety. They lack confidence
that things will go as they should, so they display an excessive sense of
responsibility that takes the form of worrying and fussing, even when things
are going well.
This One has an ongoing sense that anything could go wrong at any
minute unless they are on high alert to make sure that things happen as they
should. This One also has a faulty sense of security with regard to survival
and an implicit anxiety about things not going well and the consequences of
failure. Self-Preservation Ones can sometimes let go of worrying if they
become convinced there is nothing they can do about a situation, but it is
difficult for them to stop being vigilant if there is something they can do to
have an effect on the situation.
This tendency toward feeling anxious and constantly on guard can, in
some cases, trigger obsessive-compulsive defenses; that is, SelfPreservation Ones can become obsessive in their thinking and compulsive
or ritualistic in their behaviors as they attempt to reduce anxiety by thinking
certain thoughts or engaging in certain behaviors. The Self-Preservation
One does so to gain a sense of control over what is happening, and through
gaining a sense of control, finally be able to relax. However, there are so
many things to be done and worried about that this One is rarely able to
relax.
This subtype is the epitome of a true perfectionist, as they are especially
hard on themselves if they don’t get things right. As Naranjo points out,

Self-Preservation Ones have difficulty loosening their need for control and
allowing for a flow to happen. Instead they feel compelled to insert
themselves if necessary, to make sure every important detail gets
scrutinized and perfected. The quest to do the right thing or to find the
perfect solution is how the Self-Preservation One finds safety
The title of “worry” was given to this type as a descriptive label because
they have a passion, or a strong emotional compulsion, to worry or fret.
And more than having frequent worry as a character trait, the SelfPreservation One feels an insatiable drive to fret. Self-Preservation Ones
typically experience three convergent aspects of this “worry/fret” drive.
Constant fretting is used to 1) attain perfection, however small; or 2) avert
misfortune, however large; or 3) free themselves from blame, however
slight.
Anger lies beneath the fretting and constitutes this One’s early response
to having to worry in the first place. The young Self-Preservation One
cannot allow himself to be conscious of his anger, as the experience of
anger (or overwhelming frustration) itself represents a threat to the child
who takes on too much too early. However, older Self-Preservation Ones
are usually plenty angry and this anger shapes the personality in adulthood.
In relationships, Self-Preservation Ones demonstrate a sensitivity to
being criticized and can become very angry when they feel blamed. In times
of conflict, these Ones can be self-righteous, rigid, and unyielding. They
tend to own up to their failings (sometimes too readily) and are forgiving
when others admit guilt or apologize. Partners can feel criticized and held to
impossibly high standards, but can also count of Self-Preservation Ones to
be extremely reliable and trustworthy.
Self-Preservation Ones can get confused with Type Sixes, especially
Social Sixes, who have characteristics that make them look One-ish, like
black-and-white thinking and obedience to rules and authorities, or SelfPreservation Sixes, who also feel an underlying sense of anxiety and
insecurity. What differentiates the Self-Preservation One from the fearbased Six, however, is the central, though mostly unconscious, role of the
One’s passion of anger. Sixes are motivated by fear and doubt as opposed to
resentment. Self-Preservation Ones continually ask the question: “Why am
I always the one working to improve reality, when it benefits all of us to try
to make things right or better?” Sixes, by contrast, are preoccupied with
coping with anxiety. Ones also have more confidence in the standards of

perfection they apply, whereas Sixes continually doubt whether or not what
they do is “right.”
Eric, a Self-Preservation One, speaks:
My whole life I’ve been a worrier. I worried especially about
getting in trouble or something going wrong because I didn’t do
my best at whatever it was I was supposed to do. As a young kid, I
was pretty obsessive because it seemed to me that every time I
didn’t stay vigilant, something would go wrong and I would get
punished. In reality, I was what parents call “a great kid.” I
always got good grades because I studied obsessively to get A’s. I
argued when I felt my mom or my dad was being really unfair, but
I wouldn’t have dreamed of getting into trouble on purpose. I was
surprised to learn that not everyone has a “critical” voice going
all the time, keeping them doing the right thing and away from
doing the wrong things.

The Social One: “Non-Adaptability”
The Social One is less of a perfectionist and focuses more on being the
perfect example for others of the right way to be. This One is not an
internally anxious person striving to be perfectionistic, but rather a paragon
of correct conduct. Social Ones have a need to represent the perfect model
of the way to be or do things through their actions—to teach others by
example. Ichazo labeled this type “Non-adaptability” and Naranjo calls this
subtype “Rigidity,” describing the Social One as having a kind of “school
teacher” mentality. Non-adaptability or rigidity refers to the tendency of this
character to rigidly adhere to particular ways of being and doing things, as a
way of expressing exclusive ownership of the “right” way to be, think, and
behave.
In this Social One subtype, anger is half-hidden. Where the heat of anger
changes into warmth in the Self-Preservation One, in this personality there
is a transformation of the heat of anger into cold. This character tends to be
a cooler, more intellectual type, in which the main characteristic is control.
However, the anger of the Social One is not completely repressed, because
there is an equivalent of anger in their passion for being the owner of the

truth. In this subtype, anger gets channeled into an overconfidence about
being right or “perfect.”
The Social One has a (usually unconscious) need to feel superior or to
appear superior (because a conscious desire to be superior would constitute
bad behavior). It is as if they are implicitly saying, “I’m right and you’re
wrong.” They have an underlying need to make others wrong to have some
power over them. If I’m right and you’re wrong, then I have more right than
you to control the situation. Like my Social One father always used to say:
“I’ve never been wrong, except once, when I thought I was wrong, but I
was mistaken.”
Social Ones learn to repress emotions from a very early age; they were
usually good kids who did not cause problems. They may have been young
adults who acted “older” than they really were, who often forgot that they
were children.
A person of this subtype may purposely not adjust to changing times or
customs. A Social One tends to persist in a particular way of doing things
that she thinks is right, despite others having evolved into doing it a
different way. This One displays the general attitude, “This is how it is and
I’m going to tell you how it should be.”
Not surprisingly, Social Ones automatically take on the role of teacher.
Social Ones have the sense that demonstrating and modeling what they are
teaching is equally or more valuable than what that say. It’s the idea that a
good model goes a long way toward making the point being taught. They
may also be unaware of the need to appear superior, but may receive
feedback from others that they are acting like a “know-it-all.”
This is the Type One who resembles Type Five in that this character can
be more introverted and may seem a bit “above it all” and emotionally
detached. They separate themselves from the crowd because they are
perfect and therefore superior. They never feel completely comfortable in
the groups they frequent; they tend to feel alienated. But while Fives focus
primarily on conserving energy and resources, Ones focus more on making
things perfect and their anger is closer to the surface.
In relationships, Social Ones can have high expectations. They tend to
have more confidence in themselves than in others. They can seem remote
at times, being self-sufficient to the point of not seeming to need others. It
can also prove difficult for partners and friends to convince Social Ones that
a perspective other than their own can be correct. They are great reasoners

and will argue their point energetically. They dominate through making the
other person wrong, and it can be hard to convince them of the validity of a
competing point of view.
Francis, a Social One, speaks:
In my daily life, I tend to put a lot of energy into getting things
right, and then get annoyed when others don’t. For example, one
thing I hate is when people park over the line of a parking space,
because now the space beside it is too small for me to park my
car. I therefore make a point of always parking right between the
lines when I park my car (sometimes to my wife’s utter
exasperation: “I can’t get out on my side!”), because that’s the
right way to behave and that’s the way I would like everyone else
to behave. So it’s not so much being picky as it is about setting an
example for everyone else.
In my profession as an orchestra conductor, my attention to detail
in preparing for a rehearsal gives me great confidence when it’s
time to step in front of the orchestra at a performance. It’s like
when you know you’ve prepared well for a test. I know the music
well, I’ve gone over every part, and I’m confident that I can set a
good example to inspire the players to make good music.

The Sexual One: “Zeal” (Countertype)
While the Self-Preservation One is a perfectionist, and the Social One
unconsciously takes on the pose of someone who is “perfect” in modeling
to the right way to be, Sexual Ones focus on perfecting others. This One is
more of a reformer than a perfectionist. They have a need to improve
others, but don’t focus on being perfect themselves.
This is the only One subtype that is explicitly angry and so is the
countertype of the three One personalities. The Sexual One is impatient, can
be invasive, goes for what he or she wants, and has a sense of entitlement.
These Ones have an intensity of desire fueled by anger that motivates them
to want to improve others. This can be expressed as a sense of excitement,
passion, or idealism about the way things could be if people would reform
their behavior, or if the reforms they envision were enacted by society. This
makes them compelling and vehement.

This character feels entitled in the sense of possessing the mentality of a
reformer or a zealot—one who knows how to live or do things better and so
feels a right to assert their will over others. Like the mentality of a
conqueror, this approach can be rationalized (and made virtuous) through
the rhetoric of their adherence to a higher moral code or calling.
According to Naranjo, Ichazo gave this subtype the name, “Zeal,”
meaning “a special intensity of desire.” Zeal suggests an intensity or
excitement that fuels the desire to connect with others. It also means doing
things with care, dedication, and fervor.
This One’s anger infuses his desire with a special intensity or urgency
and the person has the sense that “I have to have it,” or “I have a right to it,”
or “I have to improve it (society or another person) to make it the way I
know it should be.”
In a collective sense, this can be seen in the idea of “manifest destiny,”
the ideology that justified the takeover of the western part of the United
States from the Native Americans in the 1800s. Despite what our
retrospective view of that period might be, this philosophy was a
justification for the white man taking over land populated by “savages.”
Another example of this ideology can be seen in the minds of conquerors,
as when the Spanish conquered South America. The rhetoric displayed
there was, “I can take this because I’m noble and civilized.”
In the Sexual One, this intensity of desire can support the impulse to
reform or perfect specific others or to make the world a better place in the
way this One believes it should be. Sometimes, this desire to perfect others
grows out of a genuine belief in an enlightened vision of reform or
idealism. However, it may at the same time be fueled by this instinctual
subtype’s need to make others more perfect. One woman I know with this
subtype reported that she felt she would be justified in leaving her husband
if he did not carry out her suggestions for his improvement. And she felt a
need to help him become a better person so she could have a better partner.
In Western culture there can be an anti-sexual or anti-instinctual
sentiment—the idea that it’s not okay to act on one’s desires. For instance,
the sinfulness of sex is so pervasive that it can be hard sometimes not to feel
improper or naughty if we allow ourselves to freely express our sexual
desires. But the Sexual One has a different, more liberated, attitude with
regard to sexual desire. There’s a kind of “go for it” mentality that can then
necessitate the finding of good reasons to support the rightness of whatever

the Sexual One wants to do. Unlike the Self-Preservation Ones, these Ones
don’t question themselves as much. Instead they are concerned more with
making others into the people they think they should be.
These Ones are avengers; they are not afraid of confrontation. They may
be containing a murderous rage that they cannot see. Their anger can be like
a volcano that erupts. They perceive themselves as strong. They have great
strength and determination and can be very brave. They are also impulsive
and do things quickly.
Sexual Ones have two sides: a more playful side oriented toward pleasure
and an aggressive, angry side. Pain is the emotion they repress the most and
the one they find most difficult to show. They may act out their
unacknowledged pain by leading a double life as a way of breaking the
rules. Some Sexual Ones display “trap-door” behavior, discharging their
anger and pain through “bad” acts. An example of this is Eliot Spitzer. As
the Attorney General of the State of New York, he crusaded against
lawbreakers, going after Wall Street criminals and prostitutes in an effort to
reform society. However, he later resigned as the Governor when he was
caught having an ongoing relationship with a prostitute himself.
In light of this type of behavior, this One can look like a type Eight. Like
Eights, they can be energetic, assertive, and strong. These Ones believe they
have a right to impose their vision and get what they need, in the same way
an Eight might overpower or dominate a situation to impose their own will.
But Eights and Ones differ in that Ones are “over-social” and Eights are
“under-social.”
Sexual Ones bring intensity and energy to relationships. They can be
forceful and insistent. They may attempt to reform their partners and
friends, conveying the sense of being on a mission or drawing on a higher
calling or authority in the things they do. They excel at pointing out what
others might need to do to reform their behavior or meet specific standards,
but focus less interest and attention in reforming their own behavior, seeing
what they do as right.
Sally, a Sexual One, speaks:
I have a strong need for order in my relationships. This order is
determined by my moral code of conduct, which holds my internal
world together. When this is disrupted (which is quite often) I can

be edgy, critical, demanding, and insensitive. I have often been
unaware of how I wanted to (and tried to) fix or improve others. It
just seems so right to bring order through clear communication
and the sharing of insights.
I can be very jealous when others seem to enjoy closer
connections than I do. And I am more than alert to my partner’s
placement of attention, especially on another woman! My
intensity often surprises me! And I see now how challenging it
can be for those around me.

“The Work” for Type One:
Charting a Personal Growth Path
ULTIMATELY, AS ONES WORK ON THEMSELVES and become more self-aware,
they learn to escape the trap of confirming their own unworthiness through
excessive criticism by seeing and accepting imperfection, lightening up on
themselves and others, and learning that they (and others) are lovable and
acceptable as they are.
For all of us, waking up to habitual personality patterns involves making
ongoing, conscious efforts to observe ourselves, reflect on the meaning and
sources of what we observe, and actively work to counter automatic
tendencies. For Ones this process can be tricky, however, because they
already overdo self-improvement and “correct” behavior. In light of this, it
may be particularly important for them to employ Enneagram-based growth
strategies that take into account the ways they already overcompensate
through a core life strategy based on “improvement.”
In this section I offer some ideas about what Ones can notice, explore,
and aim for in their efforts to grow beyond the constraints of their
personality and embody the higher possibilities associated with their type
and subtype.

Self-Observation: Dis-identifying from Your Personality by
Watching It in Action
Self-Observation is about creating enough internal space to really watch—
with fresh eyes and more distance—what you are thinking, feeling, and
doing in your everyday life. As Ones take note of the things they think, feel,
and do, they might look out for the following key patterns:

Measuring everything against an ideal standard and driving for perfection in yourself, others, and/or
the external environment through the operation of an “inner critic”

This pattern includes continually criticizing yourself and being judgmental
of others. While the main target of a One’s critical tendency varies by
subtype, Ones generally apply their standards of what is virtuous or correct
internally and externally. This can lead to procrastination (delaying
endpoints when trying to make things more perfect), “one right way” and
“black and white” thinking, and self-punishing attitudes and behavior. In
the extreme, Ones may believe that if something is not perfect, it’s
worthless. They may observe themselves devaluing and demoralizing
themselves, leading to a cycle of efforts to improve, harsh criticism despite
those efforts, and renewed efforts at improvement in light of that criticism.
Conscientiously following the rules as part of an overall effort to avoid making mistakes

Ones like structure and they find it in rules and routines. But being overly
rule-bound can make Ones rigid and inflexible. Following rules can support
the One tendency to believe they know the “one right way” to act. This
habit may create an internal sense of safety or well-being—if you’re
following the rules, you can’t be blamed!—but it can be hard to see when
you’re overdoing it to the point of making more anxiety and tension for
yourself. (And this is another vicious cycle to watch out for.)
Repressing and over-controlling feelings, needs, and impulses

In a way that mirrors their experience of their early environment, Ones
demand too much of themselves. As part of the “self-forgetting” triad of
body-based Enneagram types, Ones neglect their deeper needs and
vulnerable feelings in their total focus on doing the right thing and working
hard to make things perfect. Ones benefit from noticing when they feel
resentful and recognizing this as a clue to repressed needs and feelings. If
you are a One you may notice that internal tension builds when you overcontrol natural impulses and feelings that you (automatically) judge as
wrong or threatening. Recognizing (and compassionately accepting) your
deeper needs, impulses, and feelings can be an important first step in seeing
and reversing the efforts you exert to work against the wisdom of your
(healthy and appropriate) instincts and emotions.

Self-Inquiry and Self-Reflection: Gathering More Data to Expand
Your Self-Knowledge
As Ones observe these and other related patterns in themselves, the next
step on the Enneagram growth path is to understand these patterns more. Why
do they exist? Where do they come from? What purpose do they serve?
How do they get you in trouble when they are intended to help you? Often,
seeing the root causes of a habit—why it exists and what it is designed to do
—is enough to break out of the pattern. In other cases, with more
entrenched habits, knowing how and why they operate as defenses can be a
first step to being able to release them.
Here are some questions that Ones can ask themselves and some possible
answers they can consider to get more insight into the sources, operation,
and consequences of these patterns.
How and why did these patterns develop? How do these habits help you cope?

Through understanding the sources of their defensive patterns, Ones have
the opportunity to unlock the fixed nature of the strict requirements ruling
their lives. It helps Ones to explore how control and judgment may have
been adopted by their young self as a defense against the pain of being
criticized or punished. If Ones begin to feel more empathy for their younger
self that was faced with impossible demands, they can practice extending
more compassion to the present self that still lives under the mental burden
of this defensive strategy.
Compassion for the predicament of the young self and observation of the
“carrot and stick” dynamic of the inner critic reveals the One’s survival
strategy in an unfiltered way. These insights into how specific patterns
unfold and operate defensively reveal the underlying reasons these patterns
exist. Worrying, judging, and reforming are reasonable ways to try to exert
control in an unpredictable world. Likewise, pushing “bad” or “ugly” or
“dangerous” emotions firmly out of sight in favor of expressing the
opposite makes the One acceptable to others and worthy of their support.
These patterns became ingrained because they provided real protection.
And they still do, but Ones help themselves by recognizing that this coping
strategy can only accommodate the self that would stay the “acorn” it was
when this defensive shell formed.

What painful emotions are the Type One patterns designed to protect me from?

For all of us, the Personality operates to protect us from painful emotions,
including what psychological theorist Karen Horney calls our “basic
anxiety”—a preoccupation with the emotional stress of not getting basic
needs fulfilled. Ones adopt a strategy of flawlessness as a way to provide
themselves with a supportive structure that was missing or faulty. In this
way, a One’s virtue equates with “self-worth” and well-being, and mistakes
and failures are experienced as painful personal flaws.
The One touching on this connection between virtuousness and selfworth might also be able to observe the underlying resentment or anger that
comes from having to maintain this constant control. But anger fuels what
many Ones readily see as “bad behavior,” leading directly to guilt, worry,
pain, and regret. Many Ones (and Self-Preservation Ones in particular) can
best start by observing how afraid they might be to feel and express their
anger fully. Self-reflection in this area usefully aims at exploring when and
how Ones suppress their experience of “bad” or threatening emotions like
anger, fear, or sadness. Recognizing reaction formation as the “real time”
mechanism keeping the lid on these difficult emotions can give Ones
valuable insights for making the protective patterns of personality
conscious.
Why am I doing this? How do the Type One patterns operate in me now?

Through self-observation, any of the three Type One personalities can likely
recognize how automatic the drive is to make things “right.” For most, they
can usefully trace this driving urge back to the pain they feel when they fail
or get criticized. Ones may then see that the habit of blaming themselves
and seeing themselves (or others) as imperfect is part of the negative cycle
of judgment in the service of virtue that underlies many of their most
ingrained habits.
When Ones study their exactitude more closely, in slow motion, they will
likely see that the drive to be virtuous and “make things right” is enforced
by a strong internalized authority or “superego.” This inner authority or
parental voice has one focus: ensuring the One’s safety and well-being
through adherence to standards, rules, and ideals. In practice, an individual
One lives out this fixation in ways that vary according to his or her

instinctual focus: either they expend a large amount of mental and
emotional energy fretting and punishing themselves (Self-Preservation);
they work to hold to and model a high standard (Social); or they try to make
something or someone better (Sexual). Each of these patterns can be seen to
proceed in cycles of anxiety and resentment as the One’s world fails to
measure up.
The other side of this pattern also reveals an important function of this
drive to be virtuous: the inner critic affords the One relaxation from stress
when he or she has made every effort to “do it right.” Paradoxically, the
demands of the superego that generate the One’s resentment and anxiety
also create a powerful motivation in the form of this mental relief.
What are the blind spots of these patterns? What do Type Ones keep themselves from seeing?

Type Ones show us that we can push positive attributes of our personalities
into the Shadow as well as those we feel are negative. Ones tend to focus on
what is wrong that they can correct and make better. As a result, they often
fail to see and own what they are doing well. Ones can deepen their
understanding of themselves by recognizing that they tend to disown,
dismiss, or downplay their positive accomplishments and qualities. And
when we can’t increase our self-confidence and self-love by taking in our
goodness, we tend to stay stuck in the defensive posture of our personality.
What are the effects or consequences of these patterns? How do they trap me?

As Ones watch their personality in action over time, they can usually
recognize how their patterns of judging and exerting control perpetuate a
never-ending cycle of effort and disappointment. Seeing all the way through
these kinds of vicious circles in connection with specific patterns helps
loosen their grip. Ones can be particularly open to and capable of change
once they see how the habits they have relied on so steadfastly only deepen
their sense of inadequacy and tension.

Self-Development:
Aiming for a Higher State of Consciousness
For all of us who seek to wake up, the next step in working with type-based
knowledge of the personality is to begin to inject more conscious effort into
everything we do—to begin to actively think, feel, and act with more choice

and awareness. In this section I provide some ideas for Ones of “what to
do” after they’ve observed their key patterns and done some investigation
into their sources, operation, and consequences.
This last section is divided into three parts corresponding to three distinct
growth processes connected with the Enneagram system: 1) “what to do” to
actively counter the automatic patterns described above in the “selfobservation” section, 2) how to use the Enneagram’s Inner Flow arrow lines
as a map of growth, and 3) how to study your passion (or “Vice”) and
consciously seek to embody its opposite, the antidote, the higher “Virtue” of
the type.

The Three Main Type One Personality Patterns:
“What to Do” to Address Them
Measuring everything against an ideal standard and driving for
perfection in yourself, others, and/or the external environment
through the operation of an “inner critic”
Observe the “Improvement Paradox.” The first step for Ones is to try to stop being

so hard on themselves. Their constant striving for improvement
paradoxically keeps them fixated and resistant to real growth. They will
often fight this, because self-correction is at the heart of their survival
strategy, but having greater acceptance of and compassion for themselves is
crucial to their development. Next steps include lightening up more in
general, relaxing more, and making more time for fun and pleasure.
Accept “the perfection of imperfection.” This can also liberate Ones from much of

their energetic striving and overcompensation. But accepting imperfection
—with respect to themselves or society—can be very difficult for Ones
because their character is shaped so fundamentally around the rejection of
the “imperfect.” Ones can actively work to release themselves from the
tyranny of internal standards by continually reminding themselves that
imperfection is okay, imperfection is inevitable and natural and most of the time, and
“good enough” is good enough.

Relax the inner critic. Ones can practice relaxing the requirements of the inner

critic by questioning, challenging, and even joking with the inner judge. By
actively countering the assumptions of the inner judge, Ones can learn to
identify with a larger point of view than the narrow superego authority. This
perspective supports Ones’ conscious efforts to develop more compassion
for themselves and others.

Conscientiously following the rules and laws of society as part of
an overall effort to avoid making mistakes
Understand there are many “right” ways to do things. Ones can usefully focus on

opening up to seeing things as gray, not just black and white. It helps Ones
to realize that there are many good ways of doing things; usually, there is
not just one perfect way. Sometimes rules can be misguided.
Don’t be so hard on yourself. It can be good for others to reflect back to Ones how

hard they are on themselves. The pressure to follow rules and “do it right”
can be hard to bear, creating inner tension and stress. When Ones can see
the level of control they exert within themselves more objectively, they can
begin to find ways let up on themselves.
Develop more compassion for and acceptance of yourself. One of the really touching

things about Ones is how hard they try. It is very important for Ones to
develop more compassion for themselves as a first step to being more
accepting and less tough on themselves and others. If you are a One and this
seems difficult, start with giving yourself a lot of credit for how much effort
you put into all the things you do. No one tries harder than Ones do to be
good people—in fact, it is their tendency to be good to a fault that actually
holds them back from living a more balanced, relaxed, and peaceful life.
Remind yourself that the efforts you normally put into all you do are much
more than enough. Ones can come to know that they don’t have to achieve
perfection to have integrity and value. They can relax their focus on what
might still be wrong and choose to be untroubled by things being just as
they are.

Repressing and over-controlling feelings, needs, and impulses

Prioritize pleasure and play. In addition to noticing when and how often they

criticize themselves, Ones need to allow for more time for pleasure and
play. Crucially important for a One’s development is making an effort to
lighten up, relax, and have fun. Ones benefit from taking themselves, other
people, and things in general less seriously and carving out more time for
pleasurable activities.
Incorporate more humor and relaxation. Ones usually have an excellent sense of

humor. When they develop themselves, this humorousness can become
even more pronounced. When Ones grow, they typically become more
funny and more easygoing. For example, I believe comedian Jerry Seinfeld
is a One. Consciously using humor to lighten up situations can be an
excellent practice for Ones.
Own your positive attributes and value your feelings. Ones tend to look at themselves or

others through a negative lens, focusing most on what is not right or not
perfect. Therefore, it is important for them to make active efforts to focus
on what they or others are doing well, what they excel at, and on what
positive aspects of their talents and capacities are being demonstrated. In
particular, it is important for Ones to make efforts to get in touch with, own,
and express more of their feelings. If you are a One, regularly asking
yourself, “What am I feeling?” can be a practice that helps you become
more aware of the emotions you might be repressing.

The Inner Flow for Type One:
Using the Arrow Lines to Chart Your Growth Path
In Chapter 1, I introduced an Inner Flow model of the arrow lines that
defines one dimension of the dynamic movement within the Enneagram
framework. The connections and flow between each core Type, its “growth(through)-stress” point, and its “child-heart-(security)” point map one kind
of growth path described by the symbol. As a reminder, the arrow lines can
be seen to suggest one kind of growth path for each type:

The direction from the core point along the arrow line is the
path of development. The “growth–stress” point ahead

represents specific challenges perfectly suited to expanding the
narrow focus of our core point personality.
The direction against the arrow from the core point to the
“child–heart“ point indicates issues and themes that must be
consciously acknowledged and owned from childhood so that
we can move forward and not be held back by unfinished
business from the past. This “child-heart-security” point
represents qualities of security we unconsciously repressed,
occasionally fall back into as a comfort in times of stress, and
now must be reintegrated consciously.

Type One Moving Forward Toward Type Four:
Consciously Using the Four “Growth–Stress” Point for
Development and Expansion
The Inner Flow growth path for Type Ones brings them into direct contact
with the challenges embodied in Type Four: allowing for greater range and
depth of feeling, more melancholy and longing, and greater creativity and
self-expression (instead of just following the rules). Not surprisingly, Ones
often report that they find being in contact with Four traits painful and
uncomfortable. But exploring depth and expression of feeling with purpose
and consciousness can give the One a sense of relief at finally releasing
what they have spent considerable energy holding back. This shift may
involve contact with the depressive or melancholic feelings, but exploring

these feelings can provide the One with greater emotional freedom in all
respects. The growth–stress point of Four shows the path of development
the One can take to live more authentically by lessening the over-control of
feeling.
The One working consciously in this way can make ready use of the tools
healthy Type Fours use: artistic expression and emotional authenticity. The
aesthetic sensibility characteristic of Type Four shows how art can be a
liberating form of personal expression across the emotional spectrum. Also,
as art is inherently creative and flexible, the artist’s expression is ideally
free of absolutes or preconditions. To get started, it is helpful for the One to
select a medium that “feels right” and to give himself or herself time, space,
and permission to express without evaluating. Over time, creating art in this way
becomes less a focus of conscious design and more “in the flow” of the
moment. This practice is naturally tailored to the One’s path of exploring
feeling and expression non-judgmentally.

Type One Moving Back to Type Seven:
Consciously Using the “Child–Heart” Point to Work through Early
Issues and Find Security in Support of Moving Forward
The path of growth for Type Ones calls for them to reclaim the playful and
spontaneous impulses characteristic of Type Seven. Ones often had the
experience in childhood that non-serious pursuits like free imagination and
play were not okay. In a world that required them to be more adult and
controlled (usually much too early), Ones commonly received messages
discouraging their more creative, spontaneous qualities. These messages
motivate the young One to repress these impulses habitually.
For this reason, “moving back to Seven” can be simply a soothing break
in discipline for the over-controlled One. But Ones risk getting stuck in the
back-and-forth between the seriousness and discipline of the One
personality and the light rebellion and playfulness of the move to Seven.
When pursued with little or no conscious self-awareness, the One is likely
not reclaiming repressed spontaneity so much as temporarily escaping into
bad behavior or stimulating activities. Self-recrimination and regret
predictably follow.
Navigated consciously, a One can use “the move to Seven”
developmentally to re-establish a healthy balance between responsibility
and relaxation. Ones can focus on the qualities of this child-security point to

recognize and understand their early need to repress the irrepressible Seven
qualities. Ones can choose to consciously remind themselves that it’s now
okay now to have fun, lighten up, and choose pleasurable options. In this
way, the “open possibility” perspective of Seven shows the One a way to
consciously choose to shift attention away from the control and stress of
trying to make things go right all the time. Learning the lesson of Type
Seven—that making free time for play and fun is an essential element of life
—can give a Type One a deeply rewarding foothold in the simple pleasures
he or she was forced to leave behind in childhood.

The Vice to Virtue Conversion:
Accessing Anger and Aiming for Serenity
The developmental path from “Vice to Virtue” is one of the central
contributions of the Enneagram map in highlighting a usable “vertical” path
of growth to a higher state of awareness for each type. In the case of Type
One, the “Vice” or the passion of the type is anger and its opposite, the
Virtue, is serenity. The theory of growth communicated by this “Vice to
Virtue conversion” is that the more we can be aware of how our passion
functions within our personality and consciously work toward the
embodiment of its opposite, the more we can free ourselves from the
unconscious habits and fixated patterns of our type and evolve toward our
“high side.”
The work of Type One centers around becoming more and more
conscious of how different forms of the passion of anger play a role in
shaping the focus of attention and patterns of their personality. This is done
through self-observation and continual inquiry into the presence of anger in
their everyday experience. Ones do this work by regularly asking if anger is
playing a role in what they are thinking, feeling, and doing.
After Ones become more familiar with their experience of anger and
develop the ability to make it more conscious, they can take their work on
themselves further by making efforts to focus on enacting their Virtue, the
“antidote” to the passion of anger. In the case of Type One, the Virtue of
serenity represents a state of being that Ones can attain through consciously
manifesting their higher capacities.
Serenity is a way of being that is free of attachment to specific ways of
doing things—to having to conform to the right way. Serenity is the patient,
relaxed feeling that goes along with feeling a sense of completeness and

wholeness, a feeling that everything is as it should be and that nothing
needs to be changed or perfected. When Ones can start to transcend the
energy and emotion of anger in all its forms, they can relax and go with the
flow. They can harmonize with the natural rhythms of life without having to
impose any evaluative judgments about what should be happening or how
life should be conforming to specific standards.
To embody serenity as a One means you have examined and worked on
being more aware of your anger and the psychological issues connected to
it to the point where you can regularly rise above the compulsion to judge
everything. Achieving a state of serenity means you can rest in a calm place
inside yourself that is confident about your inherent goodness and beyond
the heat of the anger of the conditioned personality. We all naturally go up
and down along a vertical dimension of this Vice to Virtue continuum—as
we work on ourselves we rise to higher levels of functioning, but because
it’s difficult to stay awake, we also slip back in times of stress. If you are a
One, by focusing on serenity as a goal, and honestly observing the ways
that anger, criticism, and the need to judge reassert themselves, you can
consciously travel the path from being driven by the unconscious activity of
your anger to having more frequent experiences of living from the Virtue of
serenity that is your higher state of being.

Specific Work for the Three Type One Subtypes on the Path from
Vice to Virtue
The path from observing your passion to finding its antidote is not exactly
the same for each of the subtypes. The path of conscious self-work has been
characterized in terms of “grit, grind, and grace:” the “grit” of our
personality programming, the “grind” of our efforts to grow, and the
“grace” that comes to us from doing our work in conscious and positive
ways. Each subtype has to grind, or exert effort, against something slightly
different. This insight is one of the great benefits of understanding the
character of the three distinct subtypes of each of the nine types.
Self-Preservation Ones can travel the path from anger to serenity by slowing

down and noticing where anxiety and worry come from, and when, how,
and why these feelings arise. If you are a Self-Preservation One, unearth
any and all beliefs you have in your “badness” or imperfection and
challenge them: they aren’t true! You are perfectly imperfect and you will

handle the work part of life more easily and naturally if you can allow
yourself to rest easier in the knowledge of your own extreme competence
and good intentions. Most of all, make room for letting go of the need to
control everything. Realize that the fear and worry over survival relates to
an earlier part of your life that is over now. Own your essential goodness
and watch how you criticize yourself in ways you don’t need to, for things
that don’t matter, in ways that actually increase your burden. Notice that
you are no longer in that same situation in which your survival seems
threatened and punishment seems certain, but you may be acting like you
are. Strive to relax more, make more room for pleasure, don’t fix things that
don’t need fixing, and treat yourself with the same kindness and respect you
show to others.
Social Ones can travel the path from the Vice of anger to the Virtue of serenity

by reminding themselves that there is no ultimately right or perfect way in
the world of the conditioned personality. Social Ones can relax into serenity
through learning that true power comes not from doing it right or being
superior in your knowledge, but from the impulse beneath the fact that you
want so much to find the best way and share it with others. Your sincere
desire to find the best ways to do things and show others these paths to
goodness and improvement is clear proof that you are lovable as you are,
and that you don’t need to prove your worth through what you can teach us.
Remembering that there are many right or good ways to the truth of things
helps you embody the humility and relaxation in the things you do that is
the heart of serenity for you.
Sexual Ones can travel the path from anger to serenity through being clearer

about the deeper motives behind the desire to perfect others. You are worthy
not because you help us learn how to reform and improve ourselves, but
because you deeply value the higher goal of creating a better world. Explore
your impulses and feelings to the point where you gain a thorough
understanding of the sources of your zeal. Put your idealism and energy
behind the task of knowing yourself first, before you try to offer the gift of
your love of the right way to others. Your self-knowledge and humility will
only deepen and purify what you want to share with those around you. Your
high ideals and the energy you put behind their realization can truly change

the world for the better, but only after you make the unconscious fuel
behind your passion more conscious.

Conclusion
THE ONE POINT REPRESENTS THE ENERGY of anger in the service of virtue and
the ways in which we seek to control the “beast within” to cope with a
world that requires us to meet certain standards to be loved. Its path of
growth shows all of us how to transform our anger into the energy that can
helps us manifest our ideals. In each of the Type One subtypes we see a
specific character who teaches us what is possible when we can turn
righteous anger into calm acceptance through the alchemy of selfobservation, self-development, and self-knowledge.

Appendix

Help with Identifying Your Enneagram Type:
Discerning the Difference Between Pairs of Types
THE PROCESS OF DISCOVERING your correct “core type” among the nine
Enneagram types can be a tricky one. It can be difficult to find your
personality type when you first encounter the Enneagram. We all have blind
spots that can make it hard to recognize ourselves in the description of our
personality type. Our inner experience of who we are often differs from
how we might be viewed or described from the outside. We may naturally
relate to more than one of the Enneagram’s nine types because we do have
experiences of several types, not just our core type. We may have
overlapping characteristics with our “wing” types (on either side of our core
type), the types we are connected to by the arrow lines, or the types of our
parents. And we all hold a vision of who we would like to be—how we
would like to see ourselves and how we would like to be seen by others—
that may differ from how we actually are (in the present time). For all these
reasons, it can be hard to see ourselves objectively and identify with a
specific personality without some effort. Some people locate their type
immediately; for others, the typing process takes a bit more time.
This appendix contains information designed to help you find your type.
Often, if you can’t be sure of which type you are right away, you can
narrow it down to two or three types. The material below is intended to help
you understand the similarities and differences between specific pairs of
types so you can more easily discover your true (core) personality type.
Recognizing yourself in the patterns associated with one or the other of
the nine types is the first step in finding your type, and exploring the three
subtype versions of the types (in each of the type chapters) can be a useful
and enlightening second step. One of the big advantages of Naranjo’s
subtype descriptions is that they provide even more specific and nuanced

information through which you can find the best way to describe your
particular habits and tendencies using the Enneagram map.

Ones and Twos
Ones and Twos can appear similar because both have sets of rules that they
expect others to adhere to, and become upset and reactive when others do
not follow those rules. However, on closer examination, Ones have a far
more rules and expectations than do Twos, and their expectations cover a
wider array of behaviors. For example, Ones often have rules governing
work style, work product, how things should be organized, how people
should behave in a variety of situations, dress codes that define what is
appropriate and inappropriate attire in a variety of circumstances, and more.
Twos’ rules are far more focused on interpersonal relationships and how
people should treat one another. Although Ones and Twos can both be selfcritical and critical of others, most Ones are more consistently self-critical
than Twos—and also more overtly judgmental of others. For example, the
One’s “inner critic” or judge is activated eighty to ninety percent of the time
or more, whereas the Two’s criticism of self and others is less frequent and
more activated by highly distressing events like rejection and the perception
of having failed others.
Some may confuse Ones and Twos because both are dutiful and want to
perceive themselves (and have others view them) as “good” and
“responsible.” However, Ones and Twos have very different meanings for
these words. Ones believe they are “good” and, therefore, valued, if they do
everything right and make few mistakes, and “responsible” means they
keep their commitments, do their work well, deliver it on time, and are
punctual. Twos believe they are “good” and, therefore, valued, if they are
thoughtful, considerate, and selfless, and “responsible” means they are
always available when others are in need and they don’t disappoint the
people in their lives.
Ones and Twos are markedly different in many ways. For example, Ones
speak definitively, offer opinions, judgments, and ideas, and use language
that suggests they are evaluating people and situations—for example, Ones
use words such as should, ought, right, wrong, and appropriate with great
frequency. Twos, by contrast, speak in softer tones, ask questions of others
to engage them and draw them into conversation, offer advice frequently,
and focus on others in a way that makes people feel important. While Ones

can be very warm, they are rarely as consistently warm and empathic as
Twos.
A helpful way to understand the distinction between Ones and Twos is
that while Ones look internally to determine whether or not they have done
a good job or made a mistake, Twos are more highly affected by how others
perceive them than by how they view themselves. In other words, Twos
have a strong inclination to perceive themselves through the eyes of others
rather than having a strong interior sense of how valuable they are and how
well they did something. While they may not directly solicit the opinions of
others regarding the merit of their work or behavior, Twos pay greater
attention to the nonverbal cues and interpersonal behavior of others and are
far more affected by their positive and negative reactions.

Ones and Threes
Ones and Threes have some strong similarities. Both are highly taskfocused and have a deep desire to excel and to be perceived as highly
competent individuals. However, Ones’ drive to excel comes from an
internal sense of satisfaction that they have accomplished a specific task to
the very best of their ability. Threes, on the other hand, are driven by a need
to feel they have succeeded in the eyes of others. In other words, Ones seek
self-respect through their accomplishments by evaluating their own
behaviors according to their own internal standards, and Threes seek the
respect and admiration of other people, using external factors as their
reference points. For example, Threes pay close attention to how important
people respond to them, or their salaries, pay raises, and office trappings.
Both Ones and Threes emphasize tasks over relationships, and both styles
focus on their objectives, then organize the work accordingly. However, for
Threes, objectives are typically one more item on their “to-do” lists they
can check off, while Ones like to organize their work at a refined level of
detail; structuring work gives them pleasure and satisfaction. Threes, by
contrast, focus far more on goals because goal accomplishment is precisely
what makes them feel competent and successful, and they then organize the
most efficient plan they can conceive to accomplish each goal. Their plans,
while effective and efficient, are rarely as structured or systematic as those
of Ones. Not viewing the end goal as the most important piece of the task
process, Ones can tend to procrastinate for fear of making a mistake, where
Threes, in contrast, tend to want to find the fastest, most efficient path to the

goal and do not place as much attention on the possibility of making a
mistake.
The difference between Ones and Threes is most obvious in the way each
defines quality. While both would say they are quality oriented, Ones define
quality as doing the best job they are capable of doing, with no errors or
mistakes if humanly possible. Threes define quality as meeting customer
expectations, then going slightly beyond that so that the customer is more
than satisfied. However, from the Three point of view (with the exception
of the Self-Preservation Three), doing every project and task as perfectly as
possible is a poor use of time and resources and “good enough” is good
enough. From the One perspective, if there are mistakes or they know it
could have been better—even if the customer is not aware of this or
concerned about it—quality has not been achieved. For Ones, “good
enough” is rarely good enough.

Ones and Fours
Ones and Fours can appear similar in that they both take work tasks
seriously and want to do the best job they can. But while Ones focus more
on the structure and process and details of completing tasks, Fours focus
more on relationships and people and their own creative expression. Both
Ones and Fours are idealistic and appreciate quality, but while Ones attend
most to making things as perfect as they can (according to the One’s own
internal standards), the Four values creativity, authenticity, and aesthetics
above a specific ideal of perfection. Also, while both Ones and Fours base
their judgments on their internal sense of what is ideal, Fours are much
more conscious of how things look to other people.
Both Ones and Fours can be self-critical, but while the One’s inner critic
provides a running commentary about how things could have been done
more perfectly, the Four experiences a deeper sense of something being
fundamentally flawed within them. Ones take note of grammatical errors
and things being out of alignment or less than ideal, often with little or no
emotional reaction other than perhaps slight irritation, whereas Fours
frequently notice what is missing in a given situation and in themselves in a
larger sense, and may have deeper emotional reactions to what they see as
absent or “not good enough.”
Ones and Fours differ from one another in several ways. Fours attend to
other people, paying a lot of attention to what interactions are like on an

emotional level, and how much they feel connected or not to the people
around them. Ones are more likely to focus on the structure of relationships
or the work tasks they share in common.
Ones can tend to fall into seeing things in black and white, thinking there
is one right way to approach a task, while Fours make a lot of room for
creativity and self-expression and so are more likely to see many ways of
approaching a project. While both styles will want to perform at a high
level and may be perfectionistic in the things they do, the One’s priorities
are following the rules and the structure and making something as good as it
can possibly be according to the One’s standards, while the Four’s focus is
more on creative and authentic self-expression and on whether or not others
perceived them as special and unique according to more artistic standards.
In terms of emotional tone, Ones and Fours can appear quite different to
an outside observer. Ones can tend to seem reserved and at times may be
annoyed or irritated with others when they don’t follow the rules or perform
up to their expectations. Fours on the other hand, tend to have more varied
and prominent moods and can be very empathic with others’ feelings,
having a natural understanding that people have a range of emotions and
moods, both in terms of their own experience and that of others. At times
Fours can be dramatic and emotionally expressive in communicating with
others, while Ones tend to be more controlled, straightforward, concise, and
precise.

Ones and Fives
Ones and Fives can look a lot alike. Both Ones and Fives can be reserved,
logical, and task-focused, and both styles can also appear serious and
withdrawn at times. Both Ones and Fives value independence, self-reliance,
and self-sufficiency, but Fives require more privacy than Ones. Both seek
knowledge—Fives because they believe knowledge is power and Ones so
that they can be more competent, informed, and correct in the things they
do. Both appear intellectual and knowledgeable and excel at objective
analysis. Ones strive for objectivity because they want to be responsible,
they believe it is the correct thing to do, and it can prevent mistakes. Fives
are naturally objective because they think deeply about things and detach
from feelings when analyzing situations. Both understand boundaries and
the need for them. Both Ones and Fives are diligent and practical. However,
Ones are more rules-based and Fives are more appreciative of simplicity

and the conservation of resources than reliant on a specific set of rules.
Both types apply their own internal standards when judging their own or
others’ work.
While Ones and Fives share some characteristics in common, the two
styles also have some fundamental differences. While Fives can be selfcritical, Ones are much more self-critical than Fives. Ones have an internal
critic that comments on almost everything they do and say. Ones also tend
to be more judgmental of others than Fives; they can be openly angry or
irritated when others do not follow the rules or do not do things the right
way (according to the One’s sense of “the right way”). Although neither
style feels comfortable sharing emotions and both Ones and Fives tend to
hold back their emotions, Ones’ feelings tend to leak out more than Fives,
who almost always maintain a calm, unruffled reserve, even in times of
stress. Ones tend to experience some version of anger fairly regularly, and
though they try to restrain feelings, at times their anger leaks out in the form
of irritation, annoyance, or frustration, especially when people do not
perform as the One thinks they should. Fives, on the other hand, are more
likely to keep their thoughts, and especially their feelings, to themselves.
Fives automatically detach from feelings and it is very rare for them to
share their emotions with others, especially in the work setting.

Ones and Sixes
Ones and Sixes share several traits in common. Both Ones and Sixes excel
at analytical thinking, and both worry about things going wrong. Ones tend
to feel anxious about making mistakes, and Sixes tend to experience more
general anxiety related to many different things potentially going wrong in
life. In response to their worry, Ones try to be perfect and avoid making
mistakes and Sixes catastrophize and imagine worst-case scenarios. Both
Ones and Sixes are uncomfortable with success. Both styles create
problems for themselves in completing tasks and moving toward success,
Ones because they believe something is never perfect and so constantly
criticize themselves, and Sixes because they continually doubt and question
themselves and believe that becoming successful will make them a target.
Both styles also tend to be activists in support of social causes they care
about, Ones because they feel responsible for making the world a better
place, and Sixes because they identify with underdog causes and are

sensitive to people in authority positions exercising power over others in
unjust ways.
Ones and Sixes also differ in specific ways. Ones worry about making
mistakes and being wrong, according to their own standards, while Sixes
worry about danger and external threats of all kinds. Ones are self-critical
and tend to judge others, and Sixes doubt themselves and others. Related to
self-criticism and self-doubt, Ones try,—and inevitably fail—to be perfect
and Sixes either try and fail to find certainty, or find it in a specific source
of authority.
One particularly stark contrast between Ones and Sixes is that Ones tend
to obey authority, whereas Sixes tend to be suspicious of authority and may
even rebel against it. Ones follow the rules, while most Sixes question
them. (One exception to this is the Social Six, who adheres to an outside
authority and may strictly follow the rules offered by that authority.) Both
styles can procrastinate, but they do it for different reasons: Ones fear
making a mistake and so always want more time to make what they do
more perfect. Sixes continual doubting and questioning makes it hard for
them to move forward.
In terms of relating to people, generally, Ones tend to trust people and
give them the benefit of the doubt unless they break the rules or engage in
some kind of bad behavior, whereas Sixes mistrust others initially until they
have observed them enough to satisfy themselves that they are trustworthy.
After a person has earned their trust, Sixes are very loyal and supportive.

Ones and Sevens
Ones and Sevens have similar styles in many ways. Both Ones and Sevens
are quality oriented, with Ones displaying this in their attention to attaining
high standards in their work and other things they do, and Sevens seeking to
experience the best of everything, especially recreationally. Ones and
Sevens are both idealistic and visionary. Ones want things to be perfect and
work hard to make things fit an internally generated sense of the ideal.
Sevens are supremely optimistic and positive as a way of denying negative
feelings and realities, and they think a lot in terms of future possibilities.
Both Ones and Sevens have a lot of energy. Ones apply themselves
diligently to everything they do, and Sevens dedicate themselves fully to
the many activities that interest them. While both styles can be
perfectionistic, Ones are generally more consistently concerned with

perfection than Sevens, who can let go of the effort to “do it right” if it
becomes too onerous. Both intellectual and analytical, Ones and Sevens
both like to problem-solve. Finally, both Ones and Sevens are sensitive to
criticism, though the One is more likely to show it than the Seven.
One big difference between Ones and Sevens is that for Ones, work has
to come before play, and for Sevens, planning for play and engaging in
pleasurable activities is more primary. It’s not that work isn’t important to
Sevens, as Sevens can be very dedicated to their work, but they may
approach their job duties by making work into an enjoyable activity rather
than a responsibility. Although Ones are idealistic, they can seem less than
optimistic in that they look for ways to improve things, while Sevens are
relentlessly optimistic. Ones like structure and can work within prescribed
limits, while Sevens dislike limits and so may have a harder time with
constraining elements of organizational structure. For instance, Sevens are
not comfortable within a hierarchy and tend to equalize authority, while
Ones work well within defined structure of authority. Further, Ones excel at
managing the details of projects and tasks, while Sevens find this kind of
work tedious. Because Ones naturally pay attention to errors that need
correcting, they can seem to the Seven to focus too much on the negative—
Sevens always want to focus on the positive aspects of things.
Interpersonally, Ones can at times be critical or inflexible, but they are
strongly committed to self-improvement, and so will listen to others’
feedback and dedicate themselves to working on relationships. Sevens bring
a lot of positive energy and fun to relationships, but can feel challenged if
difficulties need to be addressed and worked through with others.

Ones and Eights
Ones and Eights look similar in some respects. Both are high-energy and
hardworking types, and both like to establish control and order. Both types
tend to get angry, but they experience and express anger in distinct ways.
Believing that showing anger is wrong, Ones tend to hold back their anger,
but because it is hard for the One to completely shut it off, it tends to leak
out as resentment, irritation, annoyance, or passive-aggressive behavior.
Eights, on the other hand, feel and express anger more readily, and don’t
believe it is wrong to be angry. Ones usually get angry when people break
the rules or engage in bad behavior, while Eights become angry for a wider

range of reasons. Both Ones and Eights engage in “black and white,” or “all
or nothing,” ways of thinking.
Both Ones and Eights like to be in control, but may assert control in
different ways, with Ones relying on rules and structure and standards, and
Eights exercising power in more direct ways. Ones and Eights are both
concerned about justice and fairness and can work hard in support of a
cause they believe in. And both styles can overwork and neglect their own
needs.
There are also some key differences between Ones and Eights. Eights
think in terms of the big picture, like high-level work, and dislike having to
deal with details. Ones, on the other hand, excel at and may enjoy detail
work. When engaged in a task, Ones focus a lot of attention on achieving
perfection, taking pains to make something as good as it can possibly be,
while Eights can be satisfied with “good enough.” Eights tend to go with
their impulses, can be excessive, and dislike being inhibited, while Ones
tend to over-control their impulses and delay pleasurable activities, as they
are typically more focused on correct behavior than indulging themselves.
Eights are “under-social” in that they don’t mind—or can like—going
against convention, while Ones are “over-social” and almost always
observe social conventions.
Internally, Ones are extremely self-critical, while Eights do not criticize
themselves as much. On the contrary, Eights often move into action quickly,
feeling much freer than Ones to exercise their power and their will, without
overanalyzing things or entertaining critical thoughts about their intentions
or behaviors. Ones will usually apologize if they believe they’ve made a
mistake (and they value apologies), while Eights are much less likely to feel
apologetic for the things they do. Ones typically observe and obey authority
figures, while Eights don’t like to be told what to do and may rebel against
authority if they want or need to. When communicating with others, Ones
tend to be polite and restrained, using words like “should” and “ought” and
“must,” while Eights can be direct, abrupt, intimidating, and even profane.

Ones and Nines
Ones and Nines have share several characteristics in common. In work
settings, both appreciate structure and process. Both Ones and Nines make
good mediators, Nines because they can easily see many sides of an issue
and feel motivated to create harmony, and Ones because they have

standards of fairness and can be objective and discerning judges. Both
styles tend to have a difficult time noticing and asserting their own needs
and wants, and both can be perfectionistic, though Ones are usually more
perfectionistic than Nines. Both Ones and Nines can work well within and
respect the existing authority structure, though Nines will sometimes rebel
in subtle, passive ways if they feel controlled.
Many differences also exist between Ones and Nines. Ones tend to be
fairly opinionated, often believing they know the one right way to do
something, and Nines can have a hard time locating their own opinion as a
natural consequence of being so attuned to other people’s varied
perspectives. Nines typically don’t assert a position, while Ones often
assume their position is the only correct point of view. Related to this, Ones
tend to think in terms of black and white and believe there is “one right
way,” while Nines see many shades of gray. Although both styles want to
avoid conflict, the Nine does so more than the One, who may not be able to
stop from engaging in arguments when they feel strongly about something.
Ones like to do things their way, and Nines adapt more easily to others,
often preferring to follow along with someone else’s agenda rather than
having to assert their own. When accomplishing a task, Ones make a lot of
effort to make things perfect, relying on their own internal standards of the
ideal, whereas Nines are more oriented to what other people think and want.
Ones usually have a clear vision of the correct way to do things, while
Nines seek consensus, wanting to hear from others when making decisions
about what the standards should be. Ones are more observant of rules and
will confront those who do not follow the rules, while Nines are more easygoing and much less likely to confront people who don’t obey guidelines.

Twos and Threes
Twos and Threes can look very much alike. Both manage their image and
presentation to please or attract others, and both are competent doers with
active energy. While both styles pay a lot of attention to creating an
impression that matches what others value, Twos focus on meeting others’
needs and being friendly, likable, and accommodating, while Threes focus
on achieving goals and attaining success to win the admiration and respect
of others. Although both Twos and Threes feel driven to accomplish many
things, Twos are more relationship-oriented and Threes more task-oriented.
Though both Twos and Threes want to have the approval of others, Threes

are motivated by the good feeling they get when they reach a goal and the
satisfaction that comes with appearing successful, while Twos are motivated
by earning others’ affection and being considered indispensable. Both Twos
and Threes can be confused about who they really are—with so much
energy going into the maintenance of an image designed to impress others,
it can be hard for people of both styles to have a clear sense of self. Related
to this, both Twos and Threes tend to avoid their emotions, Threes because
feeling can get in the way of doing, and Twos because feeling can get in the
way of forging positive connections with other people.
Despite their many shared characteristics, Twos and Threes also differ in
significant ways. While both styles repress or go numb to their feelings,
Twos do this less completely and tend to feel and express more emotions
more often than Threes do. While Threes can be very competitive and see
winning as important, Twos are less oriented to competition, seeing aligning
with others as more important than coming out on top. Although both Twos
and Threes can become angry at times, Twos tend to express anger when
their unacknowledged needs are not met and Threes when someone puts an
obstacle between them and their goal.
When it comes to work, Threes can prioritize work so much that they
become workaholics. Twos can also be very hardworking, but they also
prioritize relationships and pleasure. Threes pay a great deal of attention to
goals and performance and so can be highly focused on efficiency and what
it takes to get to the goal. In contrast, Twos prioritize what others need from
them, and so they adapt their agendas more to the goals of others or the
goals of the larger group. When Threes are focused on a goal, they may
have a hard time being present to listen to other people, whereas Twos’
primary focus is on tuning into other people, and so they tend to be very
empathic and present for friends, colleagues, and important others, even at
the expense of their connection to themselves. In contrast to Threes, who
can focus like a laser on a goal, Twos may abandon their own goals in favor
of meeting others’ needs or supporting others’ efforts. Finally, Twos and
Threes differ in terms of what they avoid most: Twos work hard, sometimes
behind the scenes, at achieving positive connections with others to avoid
experiencing rejection. Threes structure their work and other goal-directed
activities to avoid failure. Because of this, Twos can be less direct and
assertive than Threes, and Threes can be more driven to win and reframe
failures as learning experiences.

Twos and Fours
Twos and Fours share some characteristics in common. Both styles have an
awareness of image and pay attention to how others perceive them, but
Twos want to be seen as likable and friendly and Fours prefer to be viewed
as special and unique. Their sensitivity to how others see them and feel
about them also contributes to both styles being self-critical, as both Twos
and Fours can judge themselves for not being good enough to earn other
people’s love. Both Twos and Fours can feel their emotions fairly readily,
though Twos can sometimes repress feelings and may at times be out of
touch with their inner experience, while Fours can overdo or overidentify
feelings or dwell in some feelings in an extreme way to avoid other
feelings. Interpersonally, both Twos and Fours pay a great deal of attention
to relationships and make achieving connections with others a priority. And
people of both styles have a great capacity for empathy, and so are typically
skilled at creating relationships based on their ability to understand other
people’s thoughts and feelings.
Twos and Fours also differ in many respects. When working on a project
with others, Twos tend to be optimistic, upbeat, and supportive, while Fours
often focus on what is missing. Twos want to be helpful through meeting
others’ needs and so neglect their own needs because their attention is so
focused on others. Fours have more access to their own needs and wants
and make their own desires more of a priority. Twos are more otherfocused, meaning they pay more attention to what others feel and need than
their own feelings and needs; Fours are more self-referencing, focusing
their attention more primarily on themselves and their own inner
experience. When interacting with others, Twos place a high value on being
liked and so often adapt their presentation to be more of what they think
others want them to be, while Fours value authenticity and so do not alter as
much to please others. Twos tend to be averse to conflict, as they fear
conflict can destroy valued connections with others, while Fours are more
able to engage in conflict when necessary, finding it more important to
express truthful feelings and needs than accommodate others and avoid
anger. Overall, Twos are usually upbeat and highly positive in their mood
and emotional presentation, while Fours can dwell more in melancholy and
sadness.

Twos and Fives
While Twos and Fives are in some ways opposites, they do share some
traits in common. Both Twos and Fives can withdraw when feeling
vulnerable, though Fives rely on this strategy more often and in more
situations than Twos, and the Self-Preservation Two withdraws more
frequently than the other Two subtypes. People of both styles can need time
alone, though for Fives this is a more regular experience than for Twos.
Twos usually need to develop an ability to be alone more as part of their
self-work, whereas Fives usually need to develop an ability to be with
others more. Twos most often feel the need for alone time after having been
around people a lot, or after they have done some development work and
realize they neglect their own experience in favor of focusing a great deal of
attention on others. Both Twos and Fives also place a high value on
independence, though for Fives this is more of a way of life, and for Twos
independence may be a value they hold as an unconscious defense against
feeling too dependent on others (as they depend on others’ approval to
support their self-esteem).
In many ways, Twos and Fives are quite different. Twos feel their
emotions fairly frequently, and Fives have the habit of detaching from
emotion. Because of this, Fives can seem very reserved and unemotional
and analytical, while Twos tend to appear much more emotional and to
react to things with more feeling. In line with this, Fives have a more
objective, intellectual way of approaching tasks and discussions in contrast
to Twos’ more intuitive, feelings-based approach.
Twos like to be around people and actively seek out close relationships
with others, while Fives highly value their privacy, personal space, and
alone time, and are generally less relationship-oriented. Related to this,
Twos focus their attention on other people’s feelings and needs to a large
extent, while Fives often purposely avoid becoming too involved with other
people—especially with the emotions and emotional needs of others. Fives
hold the belief that they can easily be drained of energy and resources if
they interact a great deal with others, while Twos can feel energized and
affirmed by contact with other people, especially close friends and
individuals who are important to them. Twos tend to give very generously
to others, and can even give too much, whereas Fives are usually more
withholding, having a regular concern that people will take too much of
their resources, like time and energy, that they need for themselves.

Additionally, Twos can have a difficult time making appropriate boundaries
between themselves and others, while Fives tend to be very mindful of
establishing firm boundaries with others. For example, Twos can have a
hard time saying “no” to people, even when they want to, while Fives can
relatively easily say “no” if they don’t want to meet another person’s need.
Similarly, Twos usually consider themselves to be high-energy people who
can readily devote a good deal of their time and energy to others, while
Fives have the sense they have limited energy and so pay attention to
conserving their energy for their own needs.

Twos and Sixes
Twos and Sixes can look very similar to one another. Both Twos and Sixes
can worry and be fearful, but their fears have different sources. Sixes worry
about overall safety, bad things happening, and problems occurring, while
Twos worry more about whether or not people will perceive them in a
positive light, the possibility of being rejected, and the safety of specific
individuals who are important to them. Both Twos and Sixes are good at
reading people, but they do so with different aims. When applying their
attention to others, Sixes look for hidden agendas and ulterior motives,
whether someone is trustworthy or not, and potential threats, whereas Twos
try to ascertain other people’s moods and needs as a way to connect with
them and create rapport. When relating to people generally, Twos tend to be
aware of managing their image to please or align with others, while Sixes
do not consider their image and how others might be perceiving them as
much. In addition, Twos want to be seen and appreciated by other people,
while Sixes would often rather hide because being noticed can make them
feel vulnerable.
Both Twos and Sixes can worry about what will go wrong and work hard
to make things go well—Sixes because they are good troubleshooters and
want to anticipate problems before they happen, and Twos because they
want to please others and appear competent and attractive. When it comes
to making decisions, both Twos and Sixes can have a difficult time
deciding. Twos have a hard time making choices because they often don’t
know what they need or want. They focus so much attention on other
people, that they can be unfamiliar with their own preferences. In contrast,
decisions can be challenging for Sixes because they continually doubt
themselves and question their potential choices. They may also fear

choosing the wrong thing and imagine the negative consequences that
might result.
Twos and Sixes also differ in significant ways. Sixes usually feel
suspicious of or rebellious toward authority figures, while Twos tend to
want to form good relationships with authorities. Twos often want authority
figures and other important people to like them, so rather than being
mistrustful, they will usually lead with behaviors designed to achieve a
positive relationship with authorities if they can. Also, Sixes catastrophize
and engage in worst-case scenario thinking much more than Twos do. Twos
are usually optimistic, and while they might sometimes imagine that people
don’t like them, they usually don’t think in terms of the worst case. Another
contrast between Twos and Sixes exists in the way each deals with conflict.
Twos would like to avoid conflict most of the time if they can, while Sixes,
and especially counterphobic Sixes, can sometimes move toward conflict,
especially if they feel motivated to challenge an authority figure who they
believe is abusing their power.
Specific commonalities exist between Twos and the Self-Preservation
Sixes. Both Twos and Self-Preservation Sixes are warm and focus
considerable energy on creating friendships; they try to avoid showing
aggression (though they both may do so when reactive). Twos try to attract
friends out of a desire to be liked and affirmed, as this provides them with a
sense of well-being. In a slightly different way, Self-Preservation Sixes
want to create relationships that will serve as alliances to keep themselves
safe amid friendly others who can band together against outside threats.
Twos are motivated to form friendships by the need to be liked and seen as
indispensable, and also so that they will have friends to meet their needs in
the same way they meet others’ needs. The Six has a strong need for safety
against attack or other kinds of dangers.

Twos and Sevens
Twos and Sevens can look alike. They both tend to be upbeat, energetic,
and fun-loving. Both Twos and Sevens tend to be positive and optimistic,
Twos because they want people to like them (and they know people like
happy people), and Sevens because they like to be happy and not sad, as
they can experience “negative” emotions as threatening and anxiety
provoking. Both Twos and Sevens have hedonistic tendencies; both like to
have a good time and experience pleasure. However, the aims behind their

pleasure-seeking differ. Twos want to have positive experiences with others
to build and enjoy relationships and also as a way to indulge (or
overindulge) themselves in response to deeper feelings of need deprivation.
Sevens have the habit of seeking pleasure as a defensive way of avoiding
less positive experiences, including feelings of discomfort, pain, or anxiety.
People of both styles enjoy relating to other people and may idealize
individuals they like, Twos because they want others’ to affirm their
likability and Sevens because they like the stimulation that comes with
engaging with interesting individuals.
There are also significant differences between Twos and Sevens. Twos
pay a great deal of attention to other people, focusing on the moods and
needs of others as a way of aligning with them to create positive
connections, while Sevens focus more on their own needs and wishes,
seeking fulfillment of their own desires as a way of averting or distracting
themselves from more negative experiences. In addition, Twos will often
adapt themselves to others and abandon their own needs in an attempt to
strengthen their bonds with others, while Sevens do what they want to do
and do not often give up what they need to please someone else (though the
Social Seven is an exception to this). In relating to others, Twos also
actively manage their image as a way of attracting others by being what
they think they want them to be, while Sevens do not focus as much on
interpersonal interactions in terms of how people perceive their image. On a
fundamental level, Twos are motivated by pleasing others; Sevens are
motivated by pleasing themselves.
Twos tend to be more feeling-oriented, having regular contact with their
emotions, while Sevens are more mental and more oriented to thinking.
When completing a task, Sevens can have a difficult time focusing,
especially if the task is tedious or boring, while Twos have an easier time
focusing on completing a task, especially if what they are doing is in some
ways being seen and evaluated by others. Sevens like to have many options,
and they can feel limited if they don’t, while Twos don’t necessarily need or
want more options, as having many choices can make it more difficult for
Twos to make a decision (because they often don’t know what they need).
Social Sevens can look more like Twos than the other two Seven
subtypes because Social Sevens are more oriented to being of service to
others. Social Sevens may be confused with Twos because in addition to the
commonality of being people-oriented, Social Sevens will sacrifice their

own needs, in a way similar to Twos’ style, to support the needs of the
group. This habit of being conscious of the group and what others might
need can make the Social Sevens seem a lot like the friendly, outgoing,
generous Twos. However, despite the Social Sevens’ tendency to give more
or sacrifice their own self-interest more than the other Sevens, the Social
Sevens can still be distinguished from Twos by their knowledge of their
own needs and wants and their tendency to avoid difficult feelings.

Twos and Eights
Although they are very different, Twos and Eights do have some
commonalities and can appear similar. In particular, Social Twos can look
like Eights and (especially female) Social Eights can look like Twos. Twos
and Eights both tend to be protective of others, especially important others
in the case of Twos, and weaker or more vulnerable others in the case of
Eights. Both Twos and Eights can be impulsive, self-indulgent, and
hedonistic, Twos because they may overcompensate for not knowing what
they need (and thus may often feel deprived), and Eights because they move
quickly into action, often without thinking, and don’t like to have
inhibitions put on their desires. People of both styles can be excessive in the
things they do, like eating, working, and giving, Eights because they have
big energy and appetites and don’t like to feel limited, and Twos because
they often don’t know exactly what they need and so can overdo it at times.
Also, Twos tend to abandon themselves when they focus on others’ needs at
the expense of their own, and Eights tend to forget their own needs and
limits when they, for instance, habitually take on more and more and work
without being able to recognize their limitations. Both Twos and Eights like
to be in control, Eights because they see the big picture and want to make
order and move things forward and meet their needs, and Twos because
they want to appear competent and do things in a specific way that they
think will impress others.
There are also several contrasts between Twos and Eights. Twos focus a
great deal of attention on their image and on how people are perceiving
them, while Eights may express an attitude of “not caring what others think
of them.” Most Eights can relatively easily feel and express anger and
confront conflictual situations, even if they don’t “like” conflict. While
Twos can occasionally confront people and engage in conflict, most often
Twos repress their anger and avoid conflict because they fear it may

alienate people they want to maintain a connection with. Eights’ attention
typically focuses on power and control and who has it and how they use it.
Twos may sense this at times, but they primarily pay attention to what
people need and how they feel, not how much power they have. Although
they do not always have to be the boss or the leader, Eights can easily step
into a leadership role, especially if there is void in that area. Although Twos
can be good leaders, they usually feel more comfortable being in a
secondary support position: the leader’s right-hand or the power behind the
throne. And while Eights can dominate and impose their will rather easily,
Twos tend to read a situation in terms of what is required of them and then
alter their behavior to be what others need them to be, rather than asserting
their own will all the time (though sometimes they do so in a prideful “I
know best” kind of way). Finally, Eights tend to avoid expressing
vulnerability and usually even deny any sense of vulnerability at all. Twos,
on the other hand, can more easily express vulnerability, as they often feel
vulnerable feelings, such as hurt or sadness, and may even use their
vulnerability in unconscious ways to manipulate others.

Twos and Nines
Twos and Nines are two types that share a lot of traits in common. They
both tend to focus on others, and so they often forget or neglect their own
needs and wants in favor of allowing others’ needs and desires to be in the
foreground. Both styles overadjust to others, with Twos altering their
behavior to be what they think other people want them to be so they will
like them and Nines blending with others’ agendas to create harmony and
reduce tension and separation. Twos and Nines can both make good
mediators because they easily see and understand others’ perspectives and
opinions—in fact, they can both usually see others’ points of view more
clearly than their own.
To outside observers, Twos and Nines both appear likable, friendly, and
caring. People of both types have little or no contact with their anger,
though some Twos do feel anger occasionally when their unexpressed needs
are not met. Uncomfortable with anger and oriented to maintaining positive
connections with others, both Twos and Nines regularly avoid conflict,
though again, some Twos can be more open to conflict at times when their
more emotional nature drives them there. Both Twos and Nines can engage
in passive-aggressive behavior as it may be hard for them to assert

themselves and express anger in more direct ways out of a fear that they
will break important connections with other people.
While Twos and Nines can look very similar, they do have some
contrasting traits. While both types focus their attention primarily on others
instead of themselves, Twos tend to focus more on feelings and tend to feel
their emotions more readily, while Nines focus more on maintaining an
energetic harmony with others. Twos tend to feel a wider range of stronger
emotions more frequently than Nines, who tend to be more emotionally
steady and even. Twos move more actively toward others, proactively
reading their needs and preferences to aid in their effort to align with them
emotionally, while Nines do not seek out connections with others as
actively and do not read people’s needs as much. In addition, Twos are
more selective when it comes to the individuals they seek to establish
relationships with. Twos tend to be more attracted to some people than
others, while Nines are more democratic and do not make purposeful efforts
to pursue connections with particular people in the ways that Twos typically
do. Twos tend to have a more active, higher energy level and a faster pace
than Nines, who usually appear more relaxed and easy going. While both
styles can abandon themselves in favor of paying attention to others, Twos
tend to repress needs and feelings, while Nines “forget” or avoid paying
attention to their desires and agendas. Nines tend to tune out to their own
agenda, while Twos often have a clear agenda (especially with respect to
achieving interpersonal connections), even while they may not pay attention
to what they need.

Threes and Fours
Threes and Fours can look similar as they have some characteristics in
common. Both Threes and Fours focus their attention on how others
perceive them. While Threes pay a great deal of attention to creating an
image of success and achievement according to external standards in
specific contexts, Fours focus on communicating an image based on their
own unique sense of what they think is important to express. In addition to
focusing on image, both of these styles also belong to the heart triad and so
are oriented at a fundamental level to feelings and emotional connection.
But although both Threes and Fours are feelings-based styles, Threes tend
to avoid emotion to more easily accomplish tasks and get things done, and
Fours tend to feel their emotions more regularly and can even at times

overidentify with their own feelings. People of both styles can prioritize
relationships and often place importance on approval and recognition.
Finally, both Threes and Fours can be intense, creative, hardworking, and
competitive.
Significant differences also exist between Threes and Fours. Threes tend
to focus their attention on tasks, goals, and work, while Fours place more
importance on feelings, self-expression, and emotional connections with
others. When Threes focus on tasks, they usually look for the shortest, more
efficient, and fastest path to their goal, while Fours favor a more nonlinear,
creative, organic approach to self-expression. Threes numb out their
feelings to get things done while Fours believe that all feelings should be
felt and authentically expressed. Threes pursue goals to achieve success as
defined by the context or group, while Fours seek to manifest ideals related
to love and emotional depth through creativity, relational connection, and
authentic expression as a way of feeling special and unique.
Threes orient themselves to what others define as successful, placing a
high degree of value on attaining the material signs of success like nice
clothes and nice cars, while Fours put more attention and emphasis on their
own internal sense of how they feel and what they value. Threes focus on
specific goals and how to reach them. In contrast, Fours focus their
attention on what is missing and needed in a given situation. When
presenting themselves to others, Threes strive to match the image of
whatever other people will think is most attractive or admirable, even if it
means conforming to appear as something they’re not (and thus losing sight
of who they actually are), while Fours value authentic self-expression. In
doing this, Threes identify with an image of success (and an idealized selfimage), often appearing genuinely confident and competent. Fours identify
with a deficient self-image and usually have the sense that they are flawed
in some way. Threes pay attention to competing, winning, and avoiding
failure, while Fours focus most on authentic connection, self-expression,
and aesthetics. (Although the Sexual Four may be as competitive as a
Three, they compete more out of a more emotional sense of trying to prove
themselves worthy or superior, which is often motivated by anger or
unconscious envy.)

Threes and Fives

Threes and Fives have some similar characteristics. Both types value
emotional control and tend to avoid paying attention to their emotions.
Threes numb out their feelings to prevent emotions from interfering with
accomplishing tasks, achieving goals, and maintaining their image, while
Fives habitually detach from their emotions and focus more on thinking and
analyzing. Fives find more comfort and safety in the mental realm, and
Threes find comfort in doing and performing.
From the point of view of others who might want to forge a close
relationship with them, both Threes and Fives can at times seem
unavailable and hard to connect with. Threes can seem inaccessible because
they overidentify with their image and so may not be able to connect to and
live from their real self, and Fives because they tend to withdraw from
others as a way to reduce uncomfortable and potentially taxing emotional
entanglements. Related to this, both Threes and Fives value independence
and self-sufficiency.
Significant differences also exist between Threes and Fives. Threes tend
to be dependent on others for approval and admiration, while Fives pride
themselves on their independence and objectivity and don’t evaluate
themselves based on others’ perception of them. Threes pay a great deal of
attention to creating an image of success that others will admire as a way of
feeling valued and worthwhile, while Fives do not focus on their image in
this way. In work situations, Threes are primarily oriented toward doing
tasks and working toward goals, while Fives prioritize observing, thinking,
analyzing, and developing knowledge. Threes expend a lot of energy on
work—they spend whatever large amounts of time it takes to achieve their
chosen goals, even if it means working overtime—while Fives focus on
conserving energy and avoiding tasks and relationships that will drain them
of their energy. Fives have the sense that they have a limited amount of
energy to expend and so engage in continual efforts to be economical when
it comes to resources like time, energy, and effort. Threes, on the other
hand, can be workaholics, often work without limit, and can even bring
work on vacations. Threes can also be highly competitive in the different
areas of their lives, and can put a great deal of energy toward winning at all
costs. Fives, who can at times seem aloof or above it all, can easily
disengage from an effort if they conclude that it is not worth the
expenditure of their energy and other resources.

Threes and Sixes
Threes and Sixes have some traits in common. Threes and some Sixes, and
especially counterphobic Sixes, can be very hardworking, assertive, and
forward-moving. Both Threes and Sixes specialize in reading people,
though they do this for different reasons. Threes scan their audience to
determine what others value to create an image of themselves that others
will see as successful and admirable. Sixes read people to answer an inner
sense of threat and protect themselves by looking for hidden agendas and
ulterior motives. Both styles can be personable and friendly, with Threes
looking for approval from others and Sixes wanting to create safety through
knowing who their allies are. And both can also be practical and solutionfocused, though Threes focus on goals and finding the most efficient path to
get to the end-result, and Sixes prioritize anticipating problems and dangers
so they can prepare and find fixes proactively.
Threes and Sixes also differ in specific ways. Threes focus on moving
quickly and efficiently toward their goals, while Sixes can procrastinate for
fear of doing it wrong or because they are looking for problems. Threes are
skillful at matching an image of success and tend to appear confident in
whatever they do, while Sixes can waver through doubting and questioning.
Sixes can also become stuck in fear or paralyzed by overanalysis and
imagining the worst-case scenario. When engaging in work tasks and in
their lives in general, Threes pay attention to doing whatever it takes to
achieve success and like to be recognized for their achievements. Sixes
usually fear success and so may tend to sabotage themselves (sometimes in
an effort to avoid attracting the attention of others). Related to this, while
Threes are action-oriented and success-oriented, Sixes often avoid taking
action that might lead to success because they fear that success leads to
exposure and exposure may lead to being attacked. Being very goaloriented, Threes work toward goals without slowing down long enough to
think about what might go wrong, while Sixes almost always think of what
could go wrong, which makes them skilled troubleshooters—they naturally
think about potential obstacles in the process of accomplishing a particular
task so they can prepare and account for them. Finally, Threes can usually
work well with authorities, as long as they don’t interfere with Threes’
progress toward their goals, whereas Sixes tend to be suspicious of or
rebellious toward authority figures, fearing they will use their power against
them in unfair ways.

Threes and Sevens
Threes and Sevens can be look-alike types, sharing many characteristics.
Threes and Sevens both have a lot of energy and they both work hard,
especially on projects that they are interested in and invested in. Threes and
Sevens can both be charming, engaging, and attractive. Threes employ
these qualities to gain people’s approval, admiration, and cooperation, and
Sevens use charm as a first line of defense, to diffuse negativity, and to
create an upbeat, positive mood when interacting with others. Both Threes
and Sevens are optimistic and confident about reaching goals, Threes
because they want to create an image for others of achievement and
success, and Sevens because they habitually view things in a positive light,
and believe in endless possibilities and opportunities as a way of avoiding
difficult feelings. Related to this, both styles avoid negative feelings that
might slow them down, Threes because difficult emotions interfere with
doing and looking good, and Sevens because they fear becoming stuck in
uncomfortable experiences, like anxiety or sadness.
There are also some traits that distinguish Threes from Sevens. Threes
excel at focusing on and completing tasks, while Sevens can find it more
difficult to maintain their focus and finish tasks because they tend to get
distracted. Threes expend a lot of effort on cultivating their image and
managing others’ perceptions of them, while Sevens don’t pay as much
attention to gaining others’ approval through achieving a particular image.
Furthermore, Threes tend to be other-oriented in that they rely on others’
approval and admiration to affirm their sense of themselves, while Sevens
are self-referencing, meaning that they focus more on their own internal
experience, their own needs and desires, than on whether or not others
approve of them.
Threes prioritize work, even bringing work on vacation at times. In
contrast, Sevens prioritize pleasure, fun, and recreational experiences over
work. Threes usually work well within authority structures and workplace
limitations, as long as they support their forward progress toward their
goals, whereas Sevens dislike hierarchical structures and so equalize
authority to avoid acknowledging any limitations that might be put on them.
Finally, Sevens often focus on planning for the future instead of paying
attention to the present, while Threes tend to focus more on the present and

what needs to be done today with regard to the immediate tasks in front of
them.

Threes and Eights
Threes and Eights can look very similar to each other, having several
characteristics in common. Both Threes and Eights are hardworking and
have a great deal of energy for work tasks. Both can also overwork, with
Threes being driven to finish tasks and reach goals no matter how much
effort and time it takes, and Eights wanting to accomplish big things and
being prone to forgetting their physical needs and limits. People of both
types can feel and express anger when necessary, but they usually get angry
for different reasons. Threes often express anger and impatience when
others create obstacles between them and their goals, while Eights tend to
express anger more frequently and about a wider array of issues, including
when someone hurts someone they feel protective toward, when someone
impedes their forward progress generally, when someone tells them what to
do, when someone is unfair or unjust, and when others injure them. Both
Threes and Eights can be direct and assertive in the interest of moving tasks
and projects forward, and both can be goal- or results-oriented.
Both types can enjoy being in positions of leadership, with Threes liking
to have a say over how things go and appreciating the image-enhancing
effects of achieving a high status position within an authority structure, and
Eights wanting to be in control and have the power to set the agenda and
move work forward. Both Threes and Eights can also have a difficult time
expressing vulnerable emotions. Threes habitually avoid their feelings
because they can interfere with doing and making progress toward a goal,
and Eights deny vulnerable feelings as a way of maintaining a sense of
strength, power, and control. People of both types may also see the
expression of vulnerable feelings as a sign of weakness.
Threes and Eights also differ in particular ways. Threes focus attention
on cultivating an image of success to gain the admiration of others, while
Eights do not pay much attention to their own image and how people
perceive them. In terms of motivation, Threes work for the achievement of
goals and tasks in the service of achieving success and looking good to
others, whereas Eights are motivated by a desire for power and control and
the satisfaction of their physical needs. When it comes to the achievement
of goals, Threes excel at finding the most efficient way to reach their goals,

while Eights can have difficulty knowing how much force to apply in a
given situation in order to move closer to their goal. Related to this, Threes
are skilled at ascertaining how they will impact others, while Eights have a
blind spot with respect to how they impact others.
Threes can work within existing organizational structures, as long as
those do not impede their progress toward goals, whereas Eights can be
rebellious toward authorities and tend to want to break the rules if it suits
their purposes. Eights value the truth, but can have a hard time
distinguishing the difference between their truth and the objective truth.
Threes are good at designing their “truth” according to an image they want
to create to match the values of a specific audience. In other words, for
Eights, truth is what they say it is, and for Threes, whose fixation is “deceit”
or “self-deceit,” truth is relative and can be adapted to suit the
circumstances. Finally, Eights usually know who they are—especially in
terms of a general sense of their identity and their power and strength—but
Threes can be confused about their identity. Threes can believe they are
their image and not realize that who they really are—their true self—is
different from the image they create.

Threes and Nines
Threes and Nines share some characteristics. Both Threes and Nines tend to
be optimistic, upbeat, and likable. People of both types can be hardworking
and practical, though Threes more regularly focus on working excessively
hard. Threes and Nines also both depend on external support for a sense of
identity and direction. Threes read other people to see what they view as
successful and then design their own image to match that picture of success
to gain the approval and admiration of others. Disliking conflict and lacking
a clear sense of their own inner agenda, Nines reference others and then go
along with the wishes and wills of others as a way of finding direction and
creating harmony. In addition, both Threes and Nines can be hard to contact
at times. Threes focus a great deal of attention on their lists of things-to-do
and identify strongly with their image. This can make it hard for them to be
present and interpersonally aware from a real, solid sense of who they are.
Similarly, Nines tend to forget themselves and merge with what others want
to do as a way of being in harmony with other people and avoiding conflict.
Some of the time, however, Nines realize later that they didn’t really want

to go along with that plan, but they didn’t know it, because they tend not
know what they really want in the moment.
There are also some key differences between Threes and Nines. On a
basic level, Threes focus on accomplishing tasks and reaching goals;
conversely, Nines focus more on maintaining comfort and harmony. Threes
are fast-paced, decisive, and forward moving. Nines move at a slower pace
and have a tendency to sit on the fence. Threes are very work-oriented, and
can often be workaholics. And while some Nines can be very hardworking
(especially Social Nines), many Nines can have a harder time
accomplishing things, as they can become caught up inertia, paralyzed by
indecision, or distracted by less essential tasks. Threes usually focus very
keenly on their goals until they achieve them; in contrast, Nines tend to
become easily distracted from their own priorities, as their attention tends to
get pulled away from their goals and toward supporting others’ goals and
agendas. Threes can engage in conflict if necessary, especially if it means
removing an obstacle to their forward momentum, while Nines usually take
great pains to avoid conflict. Nines like to stay comfortable, and they tend
to avoid moving out of their comfort zone to accomplish tasks they might
view as disturbing their peace, like expressing strong opinions in public or
confronting someone about something they did incorrectly. In contrast,
Threes will more readily endure discomfort if it serves their progress
toward their goal. Finally, Nines have a strong dislike for being the center
of attention, while most Threes enjoy being in the spotlight and may even
actively seek out situations in which others notice them.

Fours and Fives
There are some clear similarities between Fours and Fives. Both types can
be introverted and can tend to withdraw from others. Fives regularly make
boundaries and move away from interpersonal contact out of a need to
conserve energy and internal resources and a fear that interacting with
others will drain them or invade their private space. Fours also tend to need
distance from others periodically to engage more deeply with their own
internal experience. Although Fours have much more regular contact with
their emotions than Fives do, both Fours and Fives can intellectualize,
meaning they can focus on thinking as a way of disconnecting from
feelings. Both styles are self-referencing, which means that they both focus
more attention on their own internal experience than on the experience of

other people. Related to this, both Fours and Fives can be introspective,
paying a large amount of attention to what is going on inside themselves.
Significant differences also exist between Fours and Fives. Fours
represent one of the most emotional types; they have contact with their
feelings on a deep level much of the time. Fives, on the other hand, are
among the least emotional, habitually detaching from their feelings. When
it comes to relating to others, Fives tend to avoid deep connections, as they
feel more comfortable limiting their emotional entanglements, whereas
Fours typically seek out deep emotional connections with others. Fives
usually keep their feelings to themselves and value self-sufficiency, and
Fours tend to share their feelings with others and value emotionally
authentic relationships.
When evaluating a situation or task, Fives communicate a detached,
objective point of view. In contrast, Fours’ particular strength is their
emotional intuition, and they tend to see things more in terms of the
emotional or emotionally creative aspects. Fives enjoy being alone and
having a large amount of private time, and while Fours can also appreciate
time alone, they are also sensitive to abandonment and loss, and they
appreciate maintaining strong emotional connections. Fives tend to be
reserved and withholding, and they can be sensitive to intrusion when in a
relationship. Fours are more dramatic, romantic, and passionate in their
relationships. In addition, Fives can easily feel drained by the needs of
others, while Fours are usually very sensitive and empathic in the face of
others’ needs. Finally, Fives tend to minimize their needs and desires, while
Fours often dwell in an experience of desiring and longing for their needs to
be met. Thus, when Fours lack what they need they feel the pain acutely,
while Fives detach from pain and focus on hoarding, economizing, and
conserving as a way to cope with not having enough of what they need.

Fours and Sixes
Fours and Sixes can have very similar outward styles. Both Fours and Sixes
are intuitive and skilled at reading others—Sixes because they protect
themselves from threats by looking to see what other people’s intentions
are, and Fours because they are emotionally intuitive and empathic—and
these traits help them form supportive relationships. People of both types
can be good troubleshooters, Fours because they naturally see what’s
missing in a specific situation, and Sixes because they automatically think

about what might go wrong so that they can prepare for it. Both Fours and
Sixes can challenge authorities and the established way of doing tasks and
projects. Fours can be nonconformist because they have original
perspectives and they are oriented to depth and the authentic expression of
feelings. And Sixes can rebel because they think in contrarian ways and feel
unsafe with and suspicious of those who have power over them. Both Fours
and Sixes tend to have negative feelings about themselves. Fours usually
feel that they are defective or missing something in some way, and Sixes
tend to doubt, question, and blame themselves. Both Fours and Sixes can
get stuck in life and have a hard time moving forward, Fours because they
can be overly self-critical and overly attached to specific emotions,
believing things are hopeless, and Sixes because they can overthink issues
and events, experience “analysis paralysis,” doubt their abilities, and fear
success.
There are also clear distinctions between Fours and Sixes. Fours are
sensitive to how they might be perceived by others and want to be seen as
unique and original. Sixes, on the other hand, do not focus on the image
others have of them as much. Fours want to stand out and be viewed as
special in the eyes of others, and Sixes identify more with the underdog and
the “everyman/everywoman” archetype. Fours live primarily from and in
their emotions, while Sixes dwell more in their heads and are
predominantly mental and analytical. Sixes’ most regular emotional
experiences involve fear, doubt, and worry, while Fours more often feel
emotions related to sadness and melancholy. Sixes search for certainty and
inevitably don’t find it or adhere to something specific out of a need for
certainty. Fours mainly focus on what they don’t have that others have—
often an unattainable love relationship—thinking that they can at last be
happy if they can attain it. Finally, Fours’ chief aim is to feel loved and
appreciated for who they are, while Sixes focus more on feeling safe in the
world.

Fours and Sevens
Fours and Sevens share some traits in common that can make them look
alike. Both types are very idealistic, with Fours focusing on ideals of love
and connection, and Sevens focusing more on envisioning the ideal in a
wider array of imaginative realms. Most notably, Fours and Sevens both
appreciate and seek out intense and stimulating experiences. Fours do this

because they live from their feelings, they appreciate the rich experience of
deeply felt emotion and passionate connections with other people, and they
dislike mundane experience. Sevens pursue intensity and stimulation
because they want to keep their mood up and their experiences fun and
positive as a way of moving away from less positive, less intense,
potentially empty, boring, or unpleasant alternatives. In this, both types
have an aversion to the everyday, the mundane, and the ordinary, finding
this realm of experience potentially empty and thus boring or even anxiety
producing. Both Fours and Sevens value creativity and self-expression,
Fours because they want to be seen and understood as special and unique
and because they appreciate aesthetics and artistry, and Sevens because they
are natural visionaries who imagine varied future possibilities, have many
interests and ideas, and appreciate the stimulating and exciting aspects of
creative expression.
In relating to others, both Fours and Sevens are self-referencing; that is,
they both focus their attention more on their own experience as opposed to
focusing primarily on others. When Fours pay attention to their own
experience, they usually do so in an emotional way, focusing on their
feelings and moods. When Sevens focus attention on themselves, however,
they most often focus on their thoughts, future plans, and desires for
amusement and pleasurable experiences, and they look to the outside world
for entertainment opportunities. Both Fours and Sevens can also be
sensitive to criticism, with Fours feeling criticism as an extra blow to their
already diminished sense of themselves as not good enough, and Sevens
experiencing it as a hurtful interruption of their youthful desire to focus on
what’s positive.
Fours and Sevens also differ in specific ways. Although both styles are
idealistic, Sevens tend to be relentlessly optimistic and Fours can be
somewhat pessimistic, especially to the outside observer, as Fours tend to
draw attention to what is missing. Also, Fours and Sevens have very
different profiles when it comes to their experience of feelings. Sevens tend
to focus on and dwell in positive feelings, naturally having very upbeat,
happy temperaments. Connected to this, Sevens can have a difficult time
staying with more difficult emotions, such as sadness or discomfort. Fours,
on the other hand, are more comfortable with a wide range of emotions and
tend to feel darker feelings like disappointment or melancholy more
regularly and more comfortably. Similarly, Sevens often reframe negatives

into positives, while Fours can feel irritated when people tell them to “look
on the bright side.” Fours have a tendency to focus on what is missing or
unavailable that they would like to have or be, and this leads them to be
more aware of the negative side of situations, issues, and relationships.
Fours comfort with feelings makes them good supporters of others who
are experiencing difficulties, while Sevens have a harder time being with
and empathizing with others who are in pain. Sevens feel challenged by
dealing with suffering, feeling much more comfort and ease focusing on
positive feelings. Conversely, Fours can find richness in suffering and see it
as a real and valuable part of human experience. Furthermore, Fours seek
deep connections with others based on the sharing of authentic feelings,
whereas Sevens can feel hesitant about making commitments and exploring
relationships on a deep emotional level because they dislike feeling limited
and so tend to move away from engaging too deeply with others at times.
Lastly, Fours value authenticity and depth, while Sevens prioritize charm
and a positive, fun-loving presentation (which Fours can find superficial or
insincere).

Fours and Eights
Fours and Eights can appear similar. People of both types are willing to
engage in conflict and can confront people if necessary, though Eights tend
to do this more regularly than Fours. Fours and Eights can both feel and
express big emotions, though Eights tend to express anger more frequently
than other emotions, and Fours can more readily feel a range of emotions,
tending especially to experience melancholy more regularly than people of
other types. Both Eights and Fours are drawn to intensity, and both types
also feel things passionately, though Fours are much more likely than
Eights to feel their vulnerable feelings. Both Fours and Eights can be
impulsive, and both can feel justified in breaking the rules—Eights because
they are bigger than the rules, and Fours because they prioritize their
internal experience and their own needs and wants over the rules. In the
work setting, both Fours and Eights can work hard and be deeply involved
in their work, with Fours viewing work as an opportunity for selfexpression and collaborative artistry and Eights wanting to make a big
impact, achieve and maintain power, and mentor and protect the people they
work with.

Significant differences also exist between Fours and Eights. Fours
typically experience a wider range of emotions than Eights, with Eights
feeling more anger and impatience than Fours and Fours feeling more
melancholy and sadness than Eights. Importantly, Eights dislike being
vulnerable and expressing any vulnerable feelings—and regularly deny the
existence of such feelings. In contrast, Fours feel vulnerable emotions on a
regular basis and can even feel some degree of comfort in a true and deep
experience of their vulnerability. Eights have a difficult time recognizing
their own physical limits, dependency needs, and softer emotions, while
(with the possible exception of some Sexual Fours) Fours are much more
familiar with their limitations, their sense of dependency, and their softer
emotions. In addition, Fours usually put much more effort than Eights into
getting their own physical and emotional needs met. And when in
relationships, Eights typically express love through protection and power,
while Fours express love through an expression of feelings and their desire
for connection.
While people of both types may challenge established authorities, Eights
are usually more regularly rebellious than Fours. Generally, Eights focus
their attention on the big picture and strategize about how to move things
forward, while Fours pay more attention to the creative process and on
attracting attention and being appreciated for their unique contributions.
When working with others, both Fours and Eights can have big energy.
Eights tend to be very assertive and can even be aggressive and dominating,
while Fours are more oriented to achieving emotional connections with
others (though Sexual Fours may also be assertive or aggressive). Related
to this, Eights tend to misperceive the impact they have on others, while
Fours are emotionally intuitive and can be highly sensitive to how they
affect the people around them. In communicating, Eights tend to be direct
and straightforward, while Fours express themselves more descriptively in
terms of how they are experiencing something emotionally. Eights do not
pay very much attention to their internal processes, while Fours can be very
introspective.

Fours and Nines
Fours and Nines have some characteristics in common. They can look alike
in that they both place a great deal of importance on the cultivation of
relationships and the achievement of connections with other people. In

addition to this, both types can lose themselves by merging with loved ones,
though Nines do this more regularly than Fours, who can more easily sense
their independent needs and desires. Both Fours and Nines can relatively
easily understand other people in a deep way, Fours because they are
emotionally intuitive and sensitive to the moods and feelings of others, and
Nines because they can often see others’ perspectives more clearly than
their own and they align with other people to create harmony. On the
downside, Fours and Nines can both feel overlooked and unimportant to
others, and they may both regularly have the feeling they are misunderstood
by others. For Fours, however, they most often experience emotions related
to being misunderstood or “not good enough.” For Nines, their experience
is more one of being overlooked and not heard, usually because Nines
themselves have a hard time taking a strong position or expressing a clear
opinion. Another key similarity is that both types have fears about not
belonging. Fours tend to feel like misfits, while Nines often have a deep
underlying concern about whether or not they belong to the group.
Fours and Nines also differ in significant ways. Fundamentally, Nines are
other-referencing and Fours are self-referencing, meaning that Nines
primarily pay attention to other people’s opinions, agendas, and moods,
while Fours prioritize their own internal experience, focusing more on their
own needs, feelings, and desires. Fours also feel a wider range of emotions
more deeply than Nines do; Nines tend to be more steady and even
emotionally. Nines can easily have their attention drawn away from their
own priorities and toward less essential substitutes and others’ agendas,
whereas Fours are more aware of and focused on satisfying their own needs
and wants. Nines are oriented to creating harmony among people, while this
is much less of a priority for the Four, who may even create or contribute to
discord if necessary as a way to push for authentic communication of
feelings. Nines avoid conflict much of the time, while Fours can engage in
conflict if necessary or may even create conflict.
Nines usually do not state their preferences, often because they don’t
know what they want, but sometimes because they believe that others’
opinions are more important than their own or they don’t want to create a
conflict. In contrast, Fours tend to believe that their opinions are of value
and that it is important to say what they think. And Fours do not always
adapt to others, regularly feeling moved to express their own disagreement
or unique perspective, whereas Nines have the tendency to overadjust to

others, often thinking that if they do not adapt to others, the connection
between them will be broken. Because of this tendency to adapt to others’
Nines also have a difficult time saying “no,” making boundaries, and
asserting themselves. Fours, on the other hand, can more often and more
easily make boundaries with others and assert their own agendas.

Fives and Sixes
Fives and Sixes are alike in many ways. Both Fives and Sixes can be
reserved and withdrawn. More phobic Sixes, in particular, resemble Fives,
as both types tend to be introverted and to seek a sense of security by
moving away from other people. Fives maintain a distance between
themselves and others because they want to guard against being depleted,
while Sixes are wary of others and withdraw out of a fear that other people
might represent some kind of danger or threat. Both types are slow to trust
others when forming relationships. This is because Fives and Sixes both
have safety and security concerns, though phobic Sixes tend to feel more
actively fearful and anxious about outside threats, while Fives excel at
avoiding fearful situations well before they occur. Fives and Sixes can be
vigilant when it comes to interacting with others and protecting their
boundaries, and both can become angry when their boundaries are
challenged. Fives have a need for clear boundaries because the want to
prevent intrusions and other potentially energy-draining interactions with
others, while Sixes have a regular fear of being attacked or shamed in some
way. Both Fives and Sixes are analytical, thinking types who intellectualize
on a regular basis, meaning they rely on their thinking function a great deal
as a way of avoiding feelings—they may think about feelings, but have a
hard time actually feeling them.
Fives and Sixes also differ in some of their traits. Counterphobic (Sexual)
Sixes can look very different from Fives, being much more extroverted than
the more introverted Five. Sixes have more apparent issues with authorities
than Fives do. Sixes can be suspicious of and even openly rebellious toward
authority figures, while Fives can follow authorities if they choose to (and if
they don’t, they may go against the established authority in a more quiet,
less noticeable way). Sixes focus their attention on questioning and
doubting in the quest for certainty, while Fives pay more attention to the
accumulation of knowledge, the reduction of needs, and the economical use

of resources like time and energy. Fives value emotional control, while
Sixes do not prioritize the control of emotions in the same way.
When analyzing a situation, Fives can be very objective in their analysis,
as they habitually detach from emotions. Sixes, on the other hand, can have
a hard time distinguishing their intuitions from their projections—they may
confuse the reality of what they are perceiving with what they fear is true.
Interpersonally, Fives withdraw from others to avoid feeling pressed to
meet their emotional needs, while Sixes do not fear meeting others’ needs
and can be very generous with their time and energy with people they trust.

Fives and Sevens
Fives and Sevens have several characteristics in common. Both Fives and
Sevens are mental types, “living” most of the time in their heads (or their
thinking function), though they do it in different ways. Believing
knowledge is power, Fives tend to think in terms of gathering and
compartmentalizing information, and Sevens tend to think in terms of
planning and interrelating and interconnecting ideas. Sevens have a
nonlinear way of thinking that gives them a talent for finding connections
and parallels between dissimilar things, while Fives prioritize collecting and
compartmentalizing information, especially about topics they have a strong
interest in. Furthermore, both Sevens and Fives have active imaginations
and sincerely enjoy learning new things and pursuing intellectual interests.
Fives and Sevens both guard against becoming too committed in social
interactions, Fives because they fear being drained by others’ needs and
Sevens because they like to have many options and dislike feeling limited.
In addition, people of both styles intellectualize; that is, they both avoid
feelings by going into thinking and analysis and detaching from emotions.
There are also clear differences between Fives and Sevens. Sevens live in
the future much of the time, in fantasies and plans about pleasurable
activities yet to happen, while Fives don’t live in the future or think in terms
of planning and play in this same way. Sevens are relentlessly positive,
habitually and automatically reframing negatives into positives, while Fives
tend to be more removed and objective in their analysis of situations and
events. Sevens focus attention on having multiple options and limitless
opportunities, while Fives focus on how to conserve energy and do what
they have to do in the most economical way, given their perception that
their resources are limited and they feel at risk of being depleted. In fact,

Sevens have a hard time making commitments because having others
depend on them makes them feel constrained and limited and
uncomfortable. Fives are more able to make commitments, precisely
because they are so good at protecting their private space and making
boundaries. While Sevens are often very socially active and gregarious,
Fives tend to make social promises much more carefully and to a very small
number of people in their lives.
When it comes to feelings, Sevens actively seek out excitement and
stimulation as a way of avoiding feelings like frustration, discomfort, and
sadness, whereas Fives merely detach from feelings, automatically letting
them go and focusing instead on thoughts and ideas. Sevens unconsciously
deal with their fear and anxiety by charming and disarming others, while
Fives detach and withdraw from others to avoid interactions that might feel
intrusive or inspire difficult feelings.

Fives and Eights
Some clear similarities exist between Fives and Eights. Fives and Eights
can both feel and express anger if someone challenges their boundaries, but
while this is one of the only situations in which Fives will openly express
anger, Eights tend to become angry more frequently over a wider range of
issues. Both Fives and Eights have a great deal of difficulty experiencing
(and, especially, expressing) vulnerable emotions. Fives detach from
emotions and withdraw from situations that might inspire vulnerable
feelings, while Eights deny their vulnerability and overcompensate by
focusing on and finding ways to communicate their strength and power.
Fives differ from Eights in many respects. Socially, Eights tend to be
extroverted and have a great deal of “big” energy, while Fives are usually
more introverted and withdrawn, with a much more reserved and low-key
energetic presence. While both Eights and Fives like to be in control, Eights
will take control in a more overt, active, aggressive way, while Fives tend to
control things more quietly and less obviously, with less expenditure of
energy. Eights tend to be excessive in the things they do, while Fives are
minimalistic, conservationist, and economical.
When analyzing a situation, Eights can have trouble distinguishing
between the objective truth and their own version of the truth, and Fives
have the particular talent of being able to be objective analysts. Eights are
impulsive; Fives are more thoughtful. For example, Eights tend to move

into action before they think things through, while Fives tend to think a
great deal about a particular move before going into action. Fives suffer
more from the possibility that they will think too much and not take action.
When in relationships, Eights usually make it clear where they stand, while
Fives can be difficult to read and may withhold information about what they
are thinking and feeling, even with close others. Lastly, Eights rebel against
any inhibition of their large capacity for pleasure or power, whereas Fives
tend to minimize and inhibit their own needs and desires and can feel
depleted by life and relationships. Fives may even forgo the possible
pleasure that a relationship may bring because the cost seems too high in
terms of time, space, or emotional energy. In contrast, most Eights feel
energized by relationships and especially physical intimacy (or the promise
of it).

Fives and Nines
Fives and Nines share some traits in common, especially from the point of
view of an outside observer. Energetically, Fives and Nines can both appear
reserved and withdrawn, though Nines do not so much withdraw from
others as they forget themselves and neglect their own agendas and
preferences in favor of creating harmony and alignment. Both can be good
mediators, as Nines can easily see all points of view and Fives are objective
analysts. Both Fives and Nines dislike conflict and can be passiveaggressive, though Nines may do this out of an inability to feel their anger
directly, and Fives may engage in this behavior because they do not want to
express their emotions openly or get involved in an emotional situation that
could be costly energetically. People of both styles have a way of distancing
themselves from their own internal experience—Fives by detaching from
emotion, and Nines from forgetting about their own preferences and
opinions. When it comes to working with others, both Fives and Nines like
structure and regularity, both want to be consulted about what they think
and may need time to reflect on that, and both have a sensitivity to and a
dislike of being controlled by others.
There are also some significant differences between Fives and Nines. In
relating to others, at the most basic level, Nines tend to merge with others,
as they find comfort in being in harmony with people, while Fives tend to
withdraw from others, as they fear being depleted by the needs and
demands of other people. Nines are other-referencing, tending to pay

attention primarily to other people, while Fives are self-referencing,
focusing more on their own internal experience and boundaries. Related to
this, Nines are overly adaptive to others, while Fives are under-adaptive to
others. Frequently not knowing what they want, Nines tend to avoid stating
their preferences and then may later feel resentful that they went along with
others and their wishes were not heard. Fives, on the other hand, almost
always know what they want, and are adept at preventing others from
interfering with what they want to do. Nines are often perceived as friendly
and affable and easygoing, while Fives tend to be perceived as more aloof
and reserved.
Wanting to be close to others in a harmonious way, Nines often don’t
perceive their need for boundaries, and as a result they don’t make
boundaries with others, while Fives prioritize making and maintaining their
boundaries. Similarly, Nines have a hard time saying no and expressing
their own preferences in the face of other people‘s wishes, while Fives can
much more easily say no. Sometimes, Nines will say yes and mean no,
while Fives will say no when they want to say no. Because of their
boundary issues, Nines may also have a hard time separating from others,
while Fives separate from others very easily, sometimes to a fault, as
withdrawal constitutes one of their primary forms of self-protection. For
Nines, paying attention to others’ agendas gets in the way of knowing their
own; for Fives, paying attention to their own agenda makes it hard to let in
and make room for the agendas (and feelings) of others.

Sixes and Sevens
Sixes and Sevens have some traits in common. Both are mental types and
so both are primarily thinking-oriented, though they do think in different
ways about different topics. Sevens focus on planning future activities, new
and interesting ideas, and interrelating and synthesizing information. Sixes
think about what might go wrong to proactively prepare for it, and they also
think in contrarian terms, questioning ideas and opinions they hear from
others in an effort to find what’s true or solve problems. Sixes and Sevens
are both quick thinkers, however, with good imaginations, though Sixes
tend to imagine worst-case scenarios, while Sevens imagine highly positive
scenarios. Both types are “fear types,” though they both may or may not be
actively aware of their fear. In particular, Sevens and counterphobic Sixes
can look very much alike, as both move toward threats in the environment

to face dangers—the Seven with charm and an engaging presentation and
the counterphobic Six with strength and the willingness to intimidate.
People of both types can get caught up in thinking too much and not move
into action, with Sixes becoming caught up in doubt and Sevens being
distracted by new ideas and multiple options or not wanting to commit to
(or be limited by) a specific course of action.
Sixes and Sevens also differ in specific ways. Sevens tend to be very
optimistic, while Sixes, who usually describe themselves as realistic, may
look more pessimistic to outside observers when they draw attention to
problems or threatening or negative possibilities. Sevens have a sunny
outlook and reframe situations in positive terms, while Sixes tend to focus
on what might go wrong so they can prepare for potential problems
occurring. Sevens and Sixes have different styles when it comes to
managing fears or concerns. Sevens move toward the source of fear with
charm and pleasantries to disarm the fearful threat with soft power, while
Sixes tend to be vigilant and watchful to see the threat coming ahead of
time so they can prepare to meet it. Counterphobic Sixes tend to move
toward threatening situations with strength, while phobic Sixes withdraw
from them, and Social Sixes obey one kind of authority or another as a way
of coping with anxiety.
Sevens focus their attention on positive possibilities and interesting and
fun things to do—they want to maintain good feelings and avoid pain and
discomfort. Sixes can hardly avoid feeling pain and discomfort, as they
focus their attention on self-doubting, questioning ideas and seeming
realities, and detecting potential dangers. Sixes look for certainty and rarely,
if ever, find it, or find it and hang on to it. Sevens are playful and
adventurous, while Sixes are careful and strategic. Sevens plan for fun,
while Sixes prepare for dealing with problems. Sevens see endless
possibilities for interesting activities in an unconscious effort to keep a safe
distance from anxiety and discomfort, while Sixes actually seek out
problems to solve as a way of feeling safe. Sixes tend to have problems
with authorities—they can be questioning and suspicious of authority and
also rebellious and challenging of authority—while Sevens equalize
authority and simply deny hierarchical power relationships, seeing
themselves as being on the same level with and friendly with both superiors
and subordinates. Sevens expect success and have a confident presentation,
while Sixes expect things to go wrong and may a worried, even paranoid

presentation. Sevens have difficulty with commitments, as they fear limits,
while Sixes are very loyal and dedicated and committed once they trust
someone or something.

Sixes and Eights
While Sixes and Eights are alike in some general ways, phobic Sixes can
look quite different from Eights and counterphobic Sixes can look a lot like
Eights. Both Eights and counterphobic Sixes can appear strong and
intimidating to others, and both styles tend to move toward threatening or
difficult situations “fearlessly,” to deal with the problem head-on. However,
Eights truly have little or no fear, while counterphobic Sixes act against
threats to quell a deeper and ongoing sense of fear that is not always
experienced consciously in the moment (but represents the “fight” part of
“fight or flight”). Eights and all Sixes tend to rebel against authority. And
Sixes and Eights can both be protective of others they care about. Eights
tend to protect the weak and vulnerable, and Sixes are frequently drawn to
supporting underdogs or underdog causes. In addition, Sixes and Eights can
both be very hardworking and practical, though Eights are more prone to
over-working, wanting to move big things forward quickly, and Sixes can
be more cautious and careful and can get slowed down by overanalysis and
endless questioning of what they are doing.
Eights also differ from Sixes in some clear ways, with Eights’ style
contrasting even more obviously with the style of phobic Sixes. Eights feels
relatively little fear and vulnerability, as the Eights’ approach to life is
based on a denial of vulnerability and an overcompensatory confidence in
their power and strength. Phobic Sixes on the other hand, feel fearful and
thus vulnerable much of the time, and so they anxiously stay vigilant for
threats and other dangers. Eights do not engage in self-doubt very often,
while Sixes continually doubt themselves. Sixes tend to overthink and can
become paralyzed by overanalysis and thus fail to act. Eights tend to act
quickly without thinking. Because Eights like to move things forward
quickly, they get impatient if others slow their forward progress, while
Sixes tend to procrastinate and slow themselves down based on fears that
there will be some sort of bad outcome or another. Sixes are slow to trust
others and they inspect people carefully to look for hidden agendas and
ulterior motives, while Eights generally trust people who appear competent
until their trust is broken. Eights can directly confront a conflictual

situation, as can counterphobic Sixes, while the phobic Six would rather
avoid conflict, but can engage in it if necessary or provoked.

Sixes and Nines
Sixes and Nines can look similar. Both Sixes and Nines can be loyal,
caring, and supportive of others. Sixes and Nines both procrastinate. Sixes
procrastinate because they fear things will go wrong and they fear success,
while Nines put off work and other tasks when they have a hard time
accessing and staying with their own agendas. Also, at times, Nines can
passively resist forward movement as a way to resist going along with what
others want them to do (without saying so and risking potential conflict).
Sixes can resist their own forward progress because they become caught up
in questioning, overanalyzing, and doubting. In addition, phobic Sixes and
Nines both want to avoid conflict, though Nines are more extreme in this
regard. And people of both types tend to be self-effacing and humble. They
both dislike being in the spotlight, but for different reasons. Sixes fear even
positive attention can make them open to attack, and Nines are very
uncomfortable being the center of attention, as they do not even place
themselves at the center of their own attention.
Sixes and Nines also have distinct characteristics that reveal the
differences between their styles. Nines tend to merge with others and trust
others easily, while Sixes tend to stand apart and be suspicious, especially at
first, until they gather enough information to ascertain whether or not
someone is trustworthy. Nines tend to go along to get along and to
overadjust to others preferences—they tend to comply with the wishes of
others as a way of avoiding discomfort and potential separation. In contrast,
Sixes are by nature mistrustful of others, and may question or test people
before going along. In light of this tendency to go along with other people’s
preferences, Nines are easily distracted from their own agenda, while Sixes
tend to remain alert in their focus of attention on potential threats.
Nines can see many different points of view, and usually take on a
mediating role when parties in a group differ in opinion. In contrast, Sixes
think in contrarian terms: they can see one side, and then they can see the
opposing side, and they tend to see things not in terms of many equally
plausible points of view, but in terms of questioning and countering
whatever view is put forward. Nines dislike conflict and do not usually have
contact with their own anger (which might lead them into a conflict), and in

this they differ greatly from the counterphobic Six, who may get angry and
move toward conflict in certain situations as a way of dealing with a
potential threat. Sixes tend to be somewhat (or very) anti-authoritarian,
while Nines, wanting to avoid conflicts and create harmony, will usually go
along with and cooperate with authority, at least on the outside.

Sevens and Eights
Sevens and Eights can look alike. Both types tend to be visionary thinkers,
able to see the big picture and future possibilities. Both can engage in
conflict if necessary, though some Sevens feel more comfortable with
confrontation than others. Sevens and Eights can both be uninhibited, selfindulgent, and excessive when it comes to seeking pleasure. And both styles
appreciate intense and stimulating experiences. In interpersonal
interactions, both Sevens and Eights dislike being limited or controlled by
other people. Individuals of both styles can be rebellious, though Eights will
rebel more openly in a straightforward fashion, and Sevens prefer a charmbased, diplomatic approach. Eights believe the best defense is a good
offense, and Sevens opt for expressing opposition to potential limitation
through soft power and the maintenance of multiple options, with charm as
a first line of defense.
Both Sevens and Eights will break the rules if it suits their purposes, and
both types can take on a great deal of work and overbook themselves. For
Sevens, overbooking represents a difficulty with saying no to exciting
possibilities and interesting activities, and for Eights, overworking can
reflect a tendency to want to do everything and forget their physical needs
and vulnerability. Both Eights and Sevens avoid or deny softer, more
vulnerable emotions, with Eights regularly denying their vulnerability and
Sevens avoiding pain and discomfort.
Significant differences also exist between Sevens and Eights. While
Eights can be rebellious when someone has authority over them, they can
also work with a good authority they respect and even enjoy being the
leader at times. In contrast, Sevens equalize authority, making friends with
bosses and subordinates as a way of denying a vertical power structure that
might constrain them. In terms of where their attention goes, Eights focus
on power and control, while Sevens focus on planning and play. And while
both types have access to their anger, Eights are more likely than Sevens to
express anger. Eights are direct and like to move things forward in a strong

and forceful way, while Sevens can have a difficult time focusing on work
tasks and get distracted, especially when the work is tedious or routine.
Eights like to make order and push projects forward quickly and effectively
to their conclusion, while Sevens prefer the idea stage to the
implementation stage and can have problems with following through.
Sevens intellectualize to escape from feeling into thinking, finding difficult
feelings uncomfortable to be with, while Eights move into action without
thinking things through. Eights also deny softer feelings or project them
onto those they perceive as weaker and then seek to protect. And finally,
when analyzing or evaluating a situation, Sevens reframe negatives into
positives, while Eights aren’t afraid of seeing and dealing with the
“negatives” and tend to see issues in terms of “all or nothing” or “black and
white” polarities.

Sevens and Nines
Sevens and Nines can look alike in that they share some common traits.
Both have friendly, optimistic dispositions. When interacting with others,
both have personable, affable styles and like to be around people. Wanting
to be liked, both Sevens and Nines tend to act in ways that make it easy for
other people to like them. Both like to keep things positive and avoid
conflict if possible, though many Sevens can do conflict if necessary and
most Nines would prefer not to. When performing tasks, both Sevens and
Nines can have a hard time maintaining a clear focus on the job at hand,
with Sevens typically being distracted by more interesting things to do and
think about, and Nines being frequently distracted by others’ agendas,
environmental claims, and inessential tasks.
Sevens and Nines also differ in several respects. While both styles are
primarily, if unconsciously, concerned with avoiding uncomfortable
feelings, Sevens pursue excitement, self-indulgent activities, and fun things
to do as a way of avoiding discomfort, whereas Nines neglect themselves
and forget their opinions and desires to avoid experiencing anger and
discomfort. Sevens are fast-paced, high-energy characters, while Nines
operate at a more relaxed pace, often experiencing inertia and indecision
related to decisions and tasks. When interacting with others, Sevens are
self-referencing, focusing their attention mainly on their own agenda; in
contrast, Nines are other-referencing, paying attention primarily to others
and not having a clear or direct experience of their own desires. Nines

merge with others and go along with other people’s agendas, while Sevens
have their own clear agenda that usually takes priority over other people’s
agendas when there is any kind of conflict between them. It’s usually easy
for Sevens to know what they want, while it’s difficult for Nines to know
what they want. For a Nine, it’s easier to know what they don’t want than
what they do want. Nines typically don’t state their preferences—which
they often don’t know—and then can become resentful of others whose
agenda they passively follow along with when they deferred their own,
even though they didn’t really want to. Sevens have their own agendas and
don’t let other people deter them from the things they really want to do.

Eights and Nines
Eights and Nines have some similar characteristics. Both dislike being
controlled by others, but they differ in how they respond to attempts at
control from the outside. Eights openly rebel, fight against, and potentially
actively overpower the other person. Nines take a much more passive
approach to asserting control, often seeming to agree or go along, while
passively resisting—saying “yes,” but acting out “no.” Both styles are part
of the “self-forgetting” triad of types, and so both can forget their own
needs and wants. Eights do this through excess and overwork, denying their
physical vulnerabilities and taking on too many responsibilities. Nines do
this through focusing on others and losing conscious contact with their own
emotions and priorities. And both Eights and Nines can readily enjoy and
seek out worldly comforts and pleasures.
Eights and Nines also differ in key ways. Eights’ primary focus of
attention is on power and control, while Nines’ attention goes first to
creating harmony and avoiding conflict. Disliking conflict and interpersonal
tension, Nines often unconsciously avoid any internal sense of their own
anger that might cause them to be at odds with someone else, while Eights
have easier access to their anger, and may feel angry frequently and have a
much easier time engaging in conflict. Eights are highly opinionated and
are direct and straightforward in asserting their opinions, while Nines often
do not know their position because they pay so much attention to
understanding others’ perspectives. For Nines, having an opinion means
risking conflict, so they are motivated to avoid their own positions, desires,
and strong feelings.

Nines can see easily everyone’s point of view and are open to seeing
many sides of an issue, while Eights see their own view most clearly and
tend to see issues in terms of black and white. Indentifying with multiple
perspectives makes Nines excellent mediators in that they can see all sides
of an issue and are motivated to help create harmony and consensus. In
contrast, Eights tend to want to assert their own opinions and have their
own way. Nines have a difficult time making boundaries and saying no,
while Eights have an easy time asserting their will and rejecting requests.
Interpersonally, Eights are often perceived by others as being intimidating,
while most people see Nines as likable, approachable, and friendly. Eights
tend to have a big impact on others, while Nines can have a difficult time
making an impact and can also be harder to contact interpersonally. Eights
like to break the rules, make their own rules, and frequently rebel against
authority, while Nines like structure and can more easily work with
authority figures. And while people of both styles avoid a certain realm of
internal experience—Eights deny their vulnerable, softer emotions, and
Nines avoid or forget their anger and preferences—Eights are much more
open about expressing themselves in the world and acting in forceful ways
to get what they need and want.

Notes
Introduction: Self-Awareness and the Enneagram
1. Jung, Collected Works 8, p. 137, quoted in Hopcke, 1989, p. 13
2. Tarnas, 1991, pp. 3-4
3. Myss, 2013, p. xiii

Chapter 1: The Enneagram as a Framework
1. Hopcke, 1989, p. 81
2. Naranjo, 1995
3. Naranjo (1994), quoted in Maitri, 2005, p. 54
4. Naranjo, 1994, p. 199
5. Maitri, 2005, p. 190
6. The subtype descriptions throughout this book are based on Claudio Naranjo’s articulation
of the Enneagram’s 27 subtype personalities. While specific citations are given throughout the
text, material has generally been drawn from Naranjo’s books (1994, 1997, and 2012) as well
as 2004, 2008, and 2012 workshops taught by him. Gonzalo Moran also contributed to my
subtype characterizations. I am very grateful to him for generously sharing his knowledge and
his interpretations with me and for translating portions of Naranjo’s 2012 book on the
subtypes.
7. Naranjo, workshops, 2004, 2008
8. In defining this new (as far as I know) interpretation of the conscious use of the
Enneagram’s arrow lines for growth, I draw on the work of Sandra Maitri (2000, p. 249), A. H.
Almaas (as cited in Maitri, 2000, p. 249), and David Burke (as cited in Stevens, 2010, p. 134135).
9. Bourgeault, 2003, p. 63

Chapter 2: The Enneagram as a Universal Symbol
1. Smith, 1992, p. vii
2. Huxley, 1944, p. vii
3. Bourgeault, 2003, pp. 64-65. Bourgeault cites Maurice Nicoll as the original author of this
parable and notes it was popularized by philosopher Jacob Needleman. Nicoll was one of G. I.
Gurdjieff’s students and has written extensively on Gurdjieff’s teachings. Needleman has also
written many articles and books about the Gurdjieff work. Gurdjieff is one of the main sources
of information about the symbolic meaning of the enneagram.
4. Helen Palmer also taught a version of this interpretation of the inner triangle of the
Enneagram in the Enneagram Professional Training Program courses I took in 1996 and 1997.
5. Schneider, 1994, p. xx
6. Schneider, 1994, p. xxiii

7. Skinner, 2006
8. Ouspensky, 1949, (In Search of the Miraculous), p. 294
9. Ouspensky, 1949, (In Search of the Miraculous) p. 280
10. Lawlor, 1982, p. 21
11. Schneider, 1994, p. 3-4
12. David Burke discussed this idea in his presentation at the annual conference of the
International Enneagram Association in 2010.
13. Schneider, 1994, p. 42
14. Schneider, 1994, p. 43
15. Schneider, 1994, p. 40
16. These three “centers of intelligence” in the enneagram also have correlates in our physical
brains: 1) the brain stem, or reptilian brain, 2) the limbic system, or emotional brain, and 3) the
cerebral cortex, the seat of higher thinking. (See Killen, 2009; Lewis, Amini, and Lannon,
2000)
17. Stevens, 2010
18. Stevens, 2010
19. Stevens 2010; Bertrand Russell, 1945
20. Blake, 1997, p. 27
21. Addison, 1998; Smoley & Kinney, 1999
22. Bennett, 1974, p. 2
23. Needleman, 1992, p. 360
24. Webb, 1980, p. 5
25. Ouspensky, 1949 (ISM), p. 19; (See also Ouspensky, 1950)
26. Ouspensky, 1949 (ISM), p. 226
27. Ouspensky, 1949 (ISM), p. 226
28. Arica web site (www.arica.org)
29. Interviews with Oscar Ichazo, p. 91
30. Arica web site (www.arica.org/articles/effross.cfm)
31. Arica web site (www.arica.org/articles/effross.cfm)
32. Claudio Naranjo, keynote address at the 2003 annual conference of the International
Enneagram Association.

Chapter 3: The Point Nine Archetype
1. Goldberg, 2005, p. 17
2. Goldberg, 2005, p. 18
3. Homer/Lattimore, 1965, p. 139
4. Naranjo, 1994, p. 258
5. Naranjo, 1994, p. 259

6. Maitri, 2005, p. 34
7. Naranjo, 1994, p. 246 and Evagrius/Sinkewicz, 2003
8. Naranjo, 1994, p. 246
9. Naranjo, 1994, p. 255
10. Naranjo, 1994, p. 255
11. Wagner, 2010, p. 497
12. Wagner 2010, p. 510
13. Naranjo 1994, p. 256
14. Naranjo, 1994, p. 256
15. Inferno, Canto VII, p. 129, Dante/Musa, 1971
16. Naranjo, 2008 subtype workshop
17. Naranjo, 1994, p. 260
18. David Burke, personal communication.

Chapter 4: The Point Eight Archetype
1. Horney, 1950
2. Jung (“The Concept of Libido” CW 5, par. 194), quoted in Goldberg, 2005, p. 32
3. Kahn, 2002, p. 26
4. Kahn, 2002, p. 26
5. Naranjo, 1997, p. 389
6. Naranjo, 1997, p. 389; Kahn, 2002, p. 26
7. Naranjo, 1995
8. Maitri, 2005, p. 53
9. Naranjo, 1995, p. 164
10. Homer/Fagles, 1996, 9:119-128
11. Goldberg, 2005, p. 28
12. Homer/Fagles, 1996, 9:306-312
13. Naranjo 1994, p. 147-148
14. Naranjo, 1997, p. 388
15. Karen Horney (1945) as quoted in Naranjo, 1994, p. 133
16. McWilliams, 1994, p. 101
17. Naranjo 1994, p. 127
18. Naranjo, 1997, p. 389
19. Maitri 2005, p. 54
20. Naranjo, 1994, p. 140
21. Drawing on Ichazo, Naranjo calls these fixed mental assumptions the “cognitive mistake”
that underlies and shapes character. Drawing on his expertise in NLP (Neuro-linguistic

programming), Enneagram author and teacher Tom Condon refers to the mental fixation of a
given personality as the “trance” of the type.
22. Naranjo, 1994, p. 142
23. Naranjo 1994, p. 142
24. Naranjo, 1994, p. 142
25. Naranjo, 1994, p. 142
26. Ichazo’s early name for Type Eight was “Ego-Venge:” Lilly & Hart, 1994, p. 223
27. Naranjo, 1994, p. 141
28. Naranjo, 1994, p. 145
29. Palmer, 1988, p. 319
30. Inferno V:39, p. 125, Dante/Musa, 1971
31. Inferno V: 30-36, Dante/Musa, 1971
32. Gonzalo Moran, personal communication
33. Naranjo, 1990, p. 127; 1997, p. 391
34. Naranjo, 1997, p. 389
35. Maitri, 2005, p. 53
36. Maitri, 2005, p. 53
37. Maitri 2000, p. 259
38. Maitri, 2005, p. 68-69
39. Maitri, 2005, p. 68
40. David Burke, personal communication

Chapter 5: The Point Seven Archetype
1. Hopcke, 1989, p. 107-108
2. Hopcke, 1989, p. 108
3. Maitri, 2005, p. 172
4. Homer/Lattimore, 1965, p. 152
5. Homer/Fagles, 1996, 10:39-47
6. Naranjo, 1994, p. 170
7. Naranjo, 1994, p. 171
8. Naranjo, 1994, p. 171
9. Naranjo, 1997, p. 349
10. Naranjo, 1994, p. 161
11. Naranjo, 1994, p. 167
12. Maitri, 2005, p. 174
13. Naranjo, 1994, p. 161
14. Maitri, 2005, p. 175

15. Maitri, 2005, p. 176
16. Wagner, 2010; Tolk, 2004
17. Maitri, 2005, p. 176
18. Naranjo, 1994, p. 161
19. Naranjo, 1994
20. Naranjo, 1994, p. 162
21. Naranjo, 1994, p. 162
22. Naranjo, 1997, p. 353
23. Naranjo, 1994
24. Naranjo, 1997, p. 353
25. Naranjo, 1997, p. 353
26. Naranjo: 1994, p. 162
27. Naranjo, 1994, p. 162
28. Naranjo, 1994, p. 162
29. Naranjo, 1997, p. 353
30. Inferno VI:34-38, 46-48, Musa, 1971
31. Inferno, p. 125, Musa, 1971
32. Goldberg, 2005
33. Eliot, 1943, pp. 13-20
34. Maitri, 2000
35. Maitri, 2005, p. 185
36. Maitri, 2005, p. 186
37. Naranjo, 1994, p. 161
38. David Burke, personal communication

Chapter 6: The Point Six Archetype
1. Maitri, 2005, p. 155
2. Maitri, 2005, p. 153
3. Erickson, 1959
4. In his writings about the Enneagram types, Naranjo highlights the fact that, when speaking
about Type Six, it is difficult to talk about one single character. (1997, p. 297)
5. Naranjo, 1995, p. 151
6. Naranjo, 1995, p. 151
7. Homer/Fagles, 1996, p, 234
8. Goldberg, 2005, pp. 56-57
9. Naranjo, 1995, p. 144
10. McWilliams 1994, p. 107

11. McWilliams: 1994, p. 108
12. McWilliams, 1994, p. 113
13. American Psychiatric Glossary, 1994
14. American Psychiatric Glossary, 1994
15. Naranjo 1994, p. 231
16. Drawing on Ichazo, Naranjo calls these fixed mental assumptions the “cognitive mistake”
that underlies and shapes character.
17. Naranjo 1994, p. 233
18. Naranjo, 1994, p. 235
19. Naranjo, 1994, p. 238
20. Naranjo, 1994, p. 236-237
21. Inferno III:52-57, 64-66, Dante/Musa, 1971.
22. Naranjo, 1997, p. 297
23. Naranjo, 1994, p. 240
24. Naranjo, 1997, p. 299
25. Naranjo, 1997, p. 299
26. Naranjo, 1994
27. Naranjo, 1997, p. 303
28. Naranjo, 1994, p. 299
29. Naranjo, 1995, p. 152
30. Maitri, 2000, p. 255
31. Maitri, 2005, p. 167
32. C. S. Lewis, quoted in Connolly, 1944.
33. David Burke, personal communication.

Chapter 7: The Point Five Archetype
1. Singer, 1972, pp. 187-188
2. Singer, 1972, p. 188
3. Singer, 1972, p. 188
4. Naranjo, 1994, p. 71
5. Almaas, 1998; Maitri, 2005
6. Naranjo, 1994, p. 72
7. Horney, 1950, p. 260
8. Goldberg, 2005
9. Goldberg, 2005, p. 68
10. Homer/Fagles 362-365, 1996, p. 240
11. Naranjo, 1997

12. Naranjo, 1994, p. 94
13. McWilliams, 1994, p. 122
14. Naranjo, 1997, p. 244
15. Naranjo, 1994, p. 66
16. Naranjo, 1995, p. 73
17. Drawing on Ichazo, Naranjo calls these fixed mental assumptions the “cognitive mistake”
that underlies and shapes character.
18. Wagner, 2010; Tolk, 2004
19. Wagner, 2010; Tolk, 2004
20 Naranjo, 1994, p. 86
21. Naranjo, 1994, p. 86
22. Naranjo, 1994, p. 85
23. Naranjo, 1994, p. 84
24. Naranjo, 1994
25. Naranjo, 1994, p. 89
26. Naranjo, 1995, p. 123
27. Naranjo, 1995, pp. 123-124
28. Inferno VII:25-31, 58-60, Dante/Musa, 1971
29. Inferno VII:25-31, Dante/Musa, 1971
30. Inferno VII:73-96, Dante/Musa, 1971
31. Naranjo, workshops, 2008 and 2012
32. Naranjo, workshops, 2004, 2008, 2012
33. Naranjo, 1997, p. 244
34. Naranjo, 1997, p. 245
35. Naranjo, 1997, p. 253
36. Maitri, 2005, p. 195
37. David Burke, personal communication

Chapter 8: The Point Four Archetype
1. Jung, 1961, p. 398
2. Homer/Lattimore, 1965, p. 170-171
3. Goldberg, 2005, p. 80
4. Goldberg, 2005
5. Goldberg, 2005, pp. 84-85
6. Naranjo, 1994, p. 97
7. Naranjo, 1994, p. 97
8. Naranjo, 1997, p. 192

9. McWilliams, 1994, p. 108
10. Naranjo 1994, pp. 96-97
11. Naranjo, 1994, pp. 97
12. Naranjo calls these fixed mental assumptions the “cognitive mistake” (or “crazy ideas”)
that underlies and shapes character.
13. Naranjo, 1997, p. 192
14. Naranjo, 1997, p. 193
15. Naranjo, 1990, p. 67
16. Naranjo, 1994, p. 111
17. Inferno, XIII: 101-102, Dante/Musa, 1971
18. Inferno XIII:64-72, 76-78, Dante/Musa, 1971
19. Inferno XIII:70, Dante/Musa, 1971
20. Naranjo, 1995, p. 126
21. Maitri, 2005, p. 147
22. Goldstein and Kornfield, 1987, p. 75
23. David Burke, personal communication

Chapter 9: The Point Three Archetype
1. Jung, 1961, p. 397
2. Hopcke, 1989, p. 86
3. Naranjo, 1995
4. Homer/Fagles, 1996, line 348, p. 281
5. David Daniels often says this in his workshops and trainings.
6. McWilliams, 1994, p. 135
7. Naranjo, 1994, p. 215
8. Naranjo, 1994, p. 199
9. Naranjo, 1994, p. 199
10. Naranjo, 1997, p. 134
11. Naranjo, 1997, 136
12. Naranjo, 1997, 135
13. Naranjo, 1997, p. 135
14. Sinkewicz (Evagrius), 2003, p. 64
15. Naranjo describes these fixed mental assumptions as the “cognitive mistake” or “crazy
ideas” that underlie and shape character.
16. Naranjo, workshops, 2004, 2008, 2012
17. Moran, 2013
18. Naranjo, 1994, p. 215

19. Naranjo, 1994
20. Bourgeault, 2003, p. 60
21. Almaas, 1998, p. 268
22. Paradise, Dante/Musa, 1984, p. 297
23. Almaas, 1998, p. 268
24. Naranjo, 1997, p. 135
25. David Burke, personal communication

Chapter 10: The Point Two Archetype
1. Jung, CW 9, Section 422, quoted in Goldberg, 2005, p. 100
2. Singer, 1972, p. 232
3. Naranjo, 1997
4. Homer/Lattimore, 1965, pp. 90-94
5. Goldberg, 2005
6. Palmer, 1988
7. Singer, 1953 p. 83
8. Naranjo, 1994, p. 176
9. Maitri, 2005, p. 112
10. Naranjo coined the phrase describing these fixed mental assumptions as the “cognitive
mistake” that underlies and shapes character. He also referred to these fixations as “crazy
ideas” because we stick with them even when they are obviously outmoded, false, or even
destructive.
11. Naranjo, 1997, p. 93, 96
12. Naranjo, 1997, p. 94
13. While many people might think that the pleasure-loving Type Seven is the most hedonistic
type in the Enneagram system, Naranjo says that “E7 is almost as hedonistic as E2.” (1997, p.
100)
14. Naranjo, 1994, p. 174
15. Inferno XXXIV: 28-30, 34-36, Dante/Musa, 1971
16. Naranjo, 1997, p. 93
17. Naranjo, 1997, p. 93
18. Naranjo also notes that Scarlett’s “never-too-scrupulous sense of honor allows her to read
the letters that the man she is interested in writes to his wife, to whom she is the hidden rival.”
(1997, p. 96) He also cites Cleopatra, Carmen, and Elizabeth Taylor as good exemplars of the
Sexual Two personality. (1997, pp. 96-98)
19. Helen Palmer used to ask this question repeatedly in her guided meditations in her
Enneagram Professional Training Program workshops and I found it to be particularly helpful.
20. Helen Palmer suggested this once in one of her Enneagram Professional Training Program
workshops and I found it to be a particularly helpful suggestion.

21. David Burke, personal communication.

Chapter 11: The Point One Archetype:
1. Goldberg, 2005, p. 113
2. Goldberg, 2005
3. Naranjo, 1994
4. Naranjo, 1994
5. McWilliams, 1994
6. Naranjo, 1994, p. 41
7. Inferno VII: 109-114, Dante/Musa, 1971
8. Inferno VIII: 37-39, Dante/Musa, 1971
9. Inferno VIII: 61-63, Dante/Musa, 1971

References

Addison, Howard A. The Enneagram and the Kabbalah: Reading Your Soul. Woodstock,
Vermont: Jewish Lights Publishing, 1998.
Almaas, A. H. Facets of Unity: The Enneagram of Holy Ideas. Berkeley, CA: Diamond Books,
1998.
Bartlett, Carolyn. The Enneagram Field Guide: Notes on Using the Enneagram in Counseling,
Therapy, and Personal Growth. Portland, Oregon: The Enneagram Consortium, 2003.
Bennett, J. G. The Enneagram. Sherbourne: Coombe Springs Press, 1974.
Blake, A. G. E. The Intelligent Enneagram. Boston: Shambhala Publications, Inc., 1996.
Bourgeault, Cynthia. The Wisdom Way of Knowing: Reclaiming an Ancient Tradition to
Awaken the Heart. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003.
Connolly, Cyril. The Unquiet Grave: A Word Cycle. New York: Curwen Press, 1944.
Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy: Volume I, Inferno. Translated by Mark Musa. New York:
Penguin Books, 1971.
Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy: Volume II, Purgatory. Translated by Mark Musa. New
York: Penguin Books, 1981.
Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy: Volume 3, Paradise. Translated by Mark Musa. New
York: Penguin Books, 1984.
Eliot, T. S. Four Quartets. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1943.
Erickson, Erik. Identity and the Life Cycle. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1959.
Evagrius Ponticus. The Praktikos Chapters on Prayer. Translated with an introduction and
notes by John Eudes Bamberger. Trappist, Kentucky: Cistercian Publications, 1972.
Goldberg, Michael J. Travels With Odysseus: Uncommon Wisdom from Homer’s Odyssey.
Tempe, AZ: Circe’s Island Press, 2005.
Goldstein, Joseph and Jack Kornfield. Seeking the Heart of Wisdom: The Path of Insight
Meditation. Boston: Shambhala, 1987.
Homer. The Odyssey. Translated by Robert Fagles. New York: Penguin Press, 1996.
Homer. The Odyssey of Homer: Translated and with an Introduction by Richmond Lattimore.
Translated by Richmond Lattimore. New York: Harper Perennial, 1965.
Hopcke, Robert H. A Guided Tour of the Collected Works of C. G. Jung. Boston: Shambhala
Publications, Inc., 1989.
Horney, Karen. Neurosis and Human Growth: The Struggle Toward Self-Realization. New
York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1950
Horney, Karen. Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis. New York: W. W.
Norton and Company, 1945.
Huxley, Aldous. The Perennial Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row, 1944.

Interviews with Oscar Ichazo: New York: Arica Institute Press, (1982).
Jung, C. G. The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. Edited by W. McGuire. Vol. 8, The Structure
and Dynamics of the Psyche. New York: Bollingen Foundation, 1960.
Jung, C. G. The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. Edited by W. McGuire. Vol. 9, part 1, The
Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. New York: Princeton Univerity Press, 1959.
Jung, C. G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Recorded and edited by Aniela Jaffe. New York:
Vintage Books, 1961.
Kahn, Michael. Basic Freud: Psychoanalytic Thought for the 21st Century. New York: Basic
Books, 2002.
Killen, Jack. “Toward the Neurobiology of the Enneagram,” The Enneagram Journal, 2:1
(July 2009): 40-61.
Lao Tzu. Tao Te Ching. Translated and interpreted by David Burke. Salisbury, Australia:
Boolarong Press, 2007.
Lawlor, Robert. Sacred Geometry: Philosophy and Practice. London: Thames & Hudson,
1982.
Lewis, Thomas, Fari Amini, and Richard Lannon. A General Theory of Love. New York:
Vintage Books, 2000.
Lilly, John C. and Joseph E. Hart. “The Arica Enneagram of the Personality,” in Who Am I?
Personality Types for Self-Discovery, ed. Robert Frager (New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher, 1994),
221.
Maitri, Sandra. The Enneagram of Passions and Virtues: Finding the Way Home. New York:
Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin, 2005.
Maitri, Sandra. The Spiritual Dimension of the Enneagram: Nine Faces of the Soul. New York:
Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, 2000.
McWilliams, Nancy. Psychoanalytic Diagnosis: Understanding Personality Structure in the
Clinical Process. New York: The Guilford Press, 1994.
Moran, Gonzalo, “How the Passion of Vanity Manifests in the Sexual Three,” Nine Points
Magazine, 2013 (online at ninepointsmagazine.org).
Mouravieff, Boris. Gnosis: Study and Commentaries on the Esoteric Tradition of Eastern
Orthodoxy, Book One, Exoteric Cycle. Robertsbridge, East Sussex: Agora Books, 1989.
Myss, Carolyn. Archetypes: Who Are You? Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 2013.
Naranjo, Claudio. Character and Neurosis: An Integrative View. Nevada City, CA:
Gateways/IDHHB Inc., 1994.
Naranjo, Claudio. The Enneagram of Society: Healing the Soul to Heal the World. Nevada
City, CA: Gateways Books and Tapes, 1995.
Naranjo, Claudio. Ennea-type Structures: Self-Analysis for the Seeker. Nevada City, CA:
Gateways/IDHHB, Inc., 1990.
Naranjo, Claudio. Transformation Through Insight: Enneatypes in Life, Literature, and
Clinical Practice. Prescott, AZ: Hohm Press, 1997.
Naranjo, Claudio. 27 Personajes en Busca del Ser: Experiencias de Transformacion a La Luz
del Eneagrama (2nd ed.). Barcelona: Editorial la Llave, 2012.

Needleman, Jacob. “G. I. Gurdjieff and His School,” in Modern Esoteric Spirituality, ed.
Antoine Faivre and Jacob Needleman (New York: Crossroad, 1992), 360.
Ouspensky, P. D. In Search of the Miraculous: Fragments of an Unknown Teaching. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1949.
Ouspensky, P. D. The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution. New York: Vintage Books,
1950.
Palmer, Helen. The Enneagram: Understanding Yourself and the Others in your Life. San
Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1988.
Russell, Bertrand. The History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1945.
Schneider, Michael S. A Beginner’s Guide to Constructing the Universe: The Mathematical
Archetypes of Nature, Art, and Science. New York: Harper, 1994.
Shirley, John. Gurdjieff: An Introduction to His Life and Ideas. New York: Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Penguin, 2004.
Singer, June. Boundaries of the Soul: The Practice of Jung’s Psychology. New York:
Doubleday, 1953.
Sinkewicz, Robert E. Evagrius of Pontus: The Greek Ascetic Corpus. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
Skinner, Stephen. Sacred Geometry: Deciphering the Code. New York: Sterling, 2006.
Smith, Huston. Forgotten Truth: The Common Vision of the World’s Religions. New York:
Harper One, 1976.
Smoley, Richard, and Jay Kinney. Hidden Wisdom: A Guide to the Western Inner Traditions.
New York: Penguin/Arkana, 1999.
Stevens, Katrina. “The Enneagram: Fundamental Hieroglyph of a Universal Language,” The
Enneagram Journal, 3:1 (July 2010): 119-145.
Tarnas, Richard. The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas that Have Shaped
our World View. New York: Ballantine Books, 1991.
Tolk, Lauren. “Integrating The Enneagram and Schema Therapy: Bringing the Soul Into
Psychotherapy.” Ph.D. diss., Wright Institute, 2004.
Wagner, Jerome. Nine Lenses on the World: The Enneagram Perspective. Evanston, IL:
NineLens Press, 2010.
Waterfield, Robin (translator). The Theology of Arithmetic. (Attributed to Iamblichus). Grand
Rapids, Michigan: Phanes Press, 1988.
Watts, Alan. The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety. New York: Vintage
Books, 1951.
Webb, James. The Harmonious Circle: The Lives and Work of G. I. Gurdjieff, P. D. Ouspensky,
and their Followers. Boston: Shambhala, 1980.

Acknowledgments
FIRST AND FOREMOST, I want to thank Claudio Naranjo for his lifetime of
work in the articulation of the human personality and the process of psychospiritual transformation. His brilliant synthesis of different streams of
thought has been the chief and most direct inspiration for this book. I also
want to pay tribute to Oscar Ichazo for his seminal work in developing the
Enneagram framework as part of his larger multidimensional model for
human growth.
I am grateful to my dear friend and college English-major-buddy, Jeff
Koppelmaa, for his enthusiastic support of this project and his thoughtful
editing of much of the material in this book. This book may not have come
into existence at all if it weren’t for the expert help and guidance of Brooke
Warner, who as my coach, editor, and publisher, enabled me to make my
vision a reality. I want to thank Krissa Lagos for her excellent work editing
what turned out to be a very long book, Carissa Bluestone for serving as a
thorough and dedicated proofreader, and Dianna Jacobsen for her timely
design help. And I appreciate the efforts of everyone on Brooke’s staff at
She Writes Press for all their hard work in the production of this book.
I am deeply grateful to Randall Alifano for helping me to become the
person who could write this book and to my incredibly wise and supportive
psychotherapy colleagues, friends, and fellow travelers in this work: Kyle
Corsiglia, Elizabeth Cotton, Debra Miller, and Delia Shargel.
Ginger Lapid-Bogda offered early, enthusiastic, and strong support of my
Enneagram work, and I am very grateful for her generous mentorship and
particularly for encouraging me to develop and communicate Claudio
Naranjo’s subtype descriptions. Matt Ahrens supported me in large and
small ways as a friend and co-teacher and I am thankful to him for being an
insightful thought-partner in the evolution of my understandings of the
types and subtypes. I am extremely grateful to Gonzalo Moran, who helped
me to recognize and articulate the subtypes at a deeper and more refined
level. I feel incredibly lucky to have met Dirk Cloete and thank him for his
timely support during key moments in this process and also for being such a
welcome “kindred spirit” in my life. I also want to appreciate Lucille Greeff
for her work with Dirk in developing practical applications of the

Enneagram that capture the true spirit of the system and that are also
technically sophisticated and cutting-edge.
I am very appreciative of the generous and unwavering support of my
parents, Paul and Marijane Chestnut. My cousin, Chris Fasano, helped me
to understand the significance of the Enneagram in my early days as a
student of the system and I am deeply grateful to him for sharing his
wisdom and insights with me. I am thankful for the love and support of my
brother, Patrick Chestnut, and my beautiful sister-in-law, Stephanie Ott, and
my great-aunt, Sister Therese Perry, as well as my longtime friends Val and
Neil Cronin, Rick Canvel, Denise Daniels, Marianne Chowning Dray,
Maddy Dray, Todd Dray, Jennifer Joss, Jan and Jon Kellogg, Teri Klein,
Felix Ott, Anne Stern, Robert Preston, Mahoko Kuramasu, Stacy and Mark
Price, and Ed and Susan Setton. In addition to making my life more fun and
meaningful, they all stepped forward in different ways to assist me
throughout the process of writing this book. I want to communicate a
special thank you to Marianne Chowning Dray for her friendship, her
objectivity, her humor, and her wise counsel.
This book has been greatly enriched by the testimonials provided by my
friends and colleagues, who generously shared their personal stories for the
subtype and “early coping strategy” examples that appear in the text. I
promised to keep their identities anonymous, so I won’t mention them by
name, but they know who they are, and I am so very grateful for their
significant contributions. I want to thank my psychotherapy clients, past
and present, who have inspired me through the courage they have shown in
doing their personal growth work. It has been a great honor to be able to
accompany them on their journeys.
I am also grateful for the companionship and support of the friends and
teachers I have come to know in the Enneagram community: Valerie Atkin,
Georgia Bailey, David Burke and the gang in Brisbane, Jutka Freiman,
(Lisa) Byungbok Han, Sandy Hatmaker, Karl Hebenstreit, Liz Holdship, Dr.
Kim, Joni Minault, Peter O’Hanrahan, Debbie Ooten, Dale Rhodes, Pamela
Roussos, Terry Saracino, Samantha Schoenfeld, Jane Tight, JoAnne
Tybinka Blasko, Marsha Underhill, Jerry Wagner, Barbara Whiteside, and
Beverly and Alan Wise. I’m also very thankful to Tom Condon, Russ
Hudson, Jerry Wagner, and the late Don Riso for their crucial and highquality work in helping so many people all around the world to gain access

to the Enneagram of personality and the larger project of personal
development through enhanced self-awareness.
Finally, I want to thank my principle and earliest Enneagram teachers,
Helen Palmer and David N. Daniels. Helen has been a long-term and
steadfast supporter of me and my work and a huge source of learning,
spiritual guidance, and intellectual inspiration. Dr. David Daniels has been
like a second father to me—I am grateful to him for motivating me to
follow in his footsteps and to (join the family business and) study
psychology. His deep dedication to the Enneagram work, and his genius in
moderating panels of self-observers to bring out the essence of this amazing
and life-changing teaching, first showed me the power of the Enneagram
map to help bring about human growth and healing.

About the Author

Photo © Asa Mathat

BEATRICE CHESTNUT is a practicing psychotherapist, coach, and business
consultant based in San Francisco. She holds graduate degrees in
communication studies and psychology and has been working with the
Enneagam for over twenty-three years. An experienced teacher and group
facilitator, she has taught at Northwestern University and trained students in
interpersonal learning groups at Stanford University and the University of
San Francisco’s Law School. She was the president of the International
Enneagram Association (2006–2007) and founding co-editor of the IEA’s
Enneagram Journal (2008–2009).

Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Introduction - Self-Awareness and the Enneagram
1 - The Enneagram as a Framework
2 - The Enneagram as a Universal Symbol of an Ancient Teaching
3 - The Point Nine Archetype
4 - The Point Eight Archetype
5 - The Point Seven Archetype
6 - The Point Six Archetype
7 - The Point Five Archetype
8 - The Point Four Archetype
9 - The Point Three Archetype
10 - The Point Two Archetype
11 - The Point One Archetype
Appendix - Help with Identifying Your Enneagram Type
Notes
References
Acknowledgments
About the Author

